SOLARIS 

by STANISLAW LEM 


SOLARIS 


CONTENTS 


The Arrival 

1 

The Solarists 

12 

The Visitors 

29 

Sartorius 

38 

Rheya 

52 

“The Little Apocrypha” 

66 

The Conference 

90 

The Monsters 

106 

The Liquid Oxygen 

132 

Conversation 

147 

The Thinkers 

158 

The Dreams 

176 

Victory 

186 


The Old Mimoid 


195 




The Arrival 


At 19.00 hours, ship’s time, I made my way to the launch- 
ing bay. The men around the shaft stood aside to let me 
pass, and I climbed down into the capsule. 

Inside the narrow cockpit, there was scarcely room to 
move. I attached the hose to the valve on my space suit 
and it inflated rapidly. From then on, I was incapable of 
making the smallest movement. There I stood, or rather 
hung suspended, enveloped in my pneumatic suit and 
yoke to the metal hull. 

I looked up; through the transparent canopy I could see 
a smooth, polished wall and, far above, Moddard’s head 
leaning over the top of the shaft. He vanished, and sud- 
denly I was plunged in darkness: the heavy protective 
cone had been lowered into place. Eight times I heard the 
hum of the electric motors which turned the screws, fol- 
lowed by the hiss of the shock-absorbers. As my eyes grew 
accustomed to the dark, I could see the luminous circle of 
the solitary dial. 

A voice echoed in my headphones: 

“Ready Kelvin?” 

“Ready, Moddard,” I answered. 

“Don’t worry about a thing. The Station will pick you 
up in flight. Have a good trip!” 

There was a grinding noise and the capsule swayed. My 


1 


muscles tensed in spite of myself, but there was no further 
noise or movement. 

“When is lift-off?” As I asked, I noticed a rustling out- 
side, like a shower of fine sand. 

“You’re on your way, Kelvin. Good luck!” Moddard’s 
voice sounded as close as before. 

A wide slit opened at eye-level, and I could see the stars. 
The Prometheus was orbiting in the region of Alpha in 
Aquarius and I tried in vain to orient myself; a glittering 
dust filled my porthole. I could not recognize a single 
constellation; in this region of the galaxy the sky was un- 
familiar to me. I waited for the moment when I would pass 
near the first distinct star, but I was unable to isolate any 
one of them. Their brightness was fading; they receded, 
merging into a vague, purplish glimmer, the sole indica- 
tion of the distance I had already travelled. My body rigid, 
sealed in its pneumatic envelope, I was knifing through 
space with the impression of standing still in the void, my 
only distraction the steadily mounting heat. 

Suddenly, there was a shrill, grating sound, like a steel 
blade being drawn across a sheet of wet glass. This was 
it, the descent. If I had not seen the figures racing across 
the dial, I would not have noticed the change in direction. 
The stars having vanished long since, my gaze was swal- 
lowed up on the pale reddish glow of infinity. I could hear 
my heart thudding heavily. I could feel the coolness from 
the air-conditioning on my neck, although my face 
seemed to be on fire. I regretted not having caught a 
glimpse of the Prometheus, but the ship must have been out 
of sight by the time the automatic controls had raised the 
shutter of my porthole. 

The capsule was shaken by a sudden jolt, then another. 
The whole vehicle began to vibrate. Filtered through the 
insulating layers of the outer skins, penetrating my pneu- 
matic cocoon, the vibration reached me, and ran through 
my entire body. The image of the dial shivered and multi- 
plied, and its phosphorescence spread out in all direc- 
tions. I felt no fear. I had not undertaken this long voyage 
only to overshoot my target! 

I called into the microphone: 


2 


“Station Solaris! Station Solaris! Station Solaris! I 
think I am leaving the flight-path, correct my course! Sta- 
tion Solaris, this is the Prometheus capsule. Over.” 

I had missed the precious moment when the planet first 
came into view. Now it was spread out before my eyes; flat, 
and already immense. Nevertheless, from the appearance 
of its surface, I judged that I was still at a great height 
above it, since I had passed that imperceptible frontier 
after which we measure the distance that separates us 
from a celestial body in terms of altitude. I was falling. 
Now I had the sensation of falling, even with my eyes 
closed. (I quickly reopened them: I did not want to miss 
anything there was to be seen.) 

I waited a moment in silence before trying once more 
to make contact. No response. Successive bursts of static 
came through the headphones, against a background of 
deep, low-pitched murmuring, which seemed to me the 
very voice of the planet itself. A veil of mist covered the 
orange-colored sky, obscuring the porthole. Instinctively, 
I hunched myself up as much as my inflated suit would 
allow, but almost at once I realized that I was passing 
through cloud. Then, as though sucked upwards, the 
cloud-mass lifted; I was gliding, half in light, half in 
shadow, the capsule revolving upon its own vertical axis. 
At last, through the porthole, the gigantic ball of the sun 
appeared, looming up on the left and disappearing to the 
right. 

A distant voice reached me through the murmuring 
and crackling. 

“Station Solaris calling! Station Solaris calling! The 
capsule will land at zero-hour. I repeat, the capsule will 
land at zero-hour. Stand by for count-down. Two hundred 
and fifty, two hundred and forty-nine, two hundred and 
forty-eight. . . ” 

The words were punctuated by sharp screeching 
sounds; automatic equipment was intoning the phrases of 
the reception-drill. This was surprising, to say the least. 
As a rule, men on space stations were eager to greet a 
newcomer, especially if he was arriving direct from Earth. 
I did not have long to ponder this, for the sun’s orbit. 


3 


which had so far encircled me, shifted unexpectedly, and 
the incandescent disc appeared now to the right, now to 
the left, seeming to dance on the planet’s horizon. I was 
swinging like a giant pendulum while the planet, its sur- 
face wrinkled with purplish-blue and black furrows, rose 
up in front of me like a wall. As my head began to spin, 
I caught sight of a tiny pattern of green and white dots; 
it was the station’s positioning-marker. Something de- 
tached itself with a snap from the cone of the capsule; with 
a fierce jerk, the long parachute collar released its hoops, 
and the noise which followed reminded me irresistibly of 
Earth: for the first time after so many months, the moan- 
ing of the wind. 

Everything went quickly after this. So far, I had known 
that I must be falling; now I could see it for myself. The 
green and white checker-board grew rapidly larger and I 
could see that it was painted on an elongated silvery body, 
shaped like a whale, its flanks bristling with radar anten- 
nae. This metal colossus, which was pierced with several 
rows of shadowy apertures, was not resting on the planet 
itself but suspended above it, casting upon the inky sur- 
face beneath an ellipsoidal shadow of even deeper black- 
ness. I could make out the slate-colored ripples of the 
ocean, stirring with a faint motion. Suddenly, the clouds 
rose to a great height, rimmed with a blinding crimson 
glare; the lurid sky became grey, distant and flat; every- 
thing was blotted out; I was falling in a spin. 

A sharp jolt, and the capsule righted itself. Through the 
porthole, I could see the ocean once more, the waves like 
crests of glittering quicksilver. The hoops of the para- 
chute, their cords snapped, flapped furiously over the 
waves, carried on the wind. The capsule gently de- 
scended, swaying with a peculiar slow-motion rhythm im- 
posed on it by the artificial magnetic field; there was just 
time to glimpse the launchingpads and the parabolic re- 
flectors of two radio-telescopes on top of their pierced- 
steel towers. 

With the clang of steel rebounding against steel, the 
capsule came to a stop. A hatch opened, and with a long, 
harsh sigh, the metal shell which imprisoned me reached 
the end of its voyage. 


4 



I heard the mechanical voice from the control center: 

“Station Solaris. Zero and zero. The capsule has 
landed. Out.” 

Feeling a vague pressure on my chest and a disagreea- 
ble heaviness in the pit of my stomach, I seized the control 
levers with both hands and cut the contacts. A green in- 
dicator lit up: ‘ARRIVAL.’ The capsule opened, and the 
pneumatic padding shoved me gently from behind, so 
that, in order to keep my balance, I had to take a step 
forward. 

With a muffled sigh of resignation, the space-suit ex- 
pelled its air. I was free. 

I found myself inside a vast, silver funnel, as high as a 
cathedral nave. A cluster of colored pipes ran down the 
sloping walls and disappeared into rounded orifices. I 
turned round. The ventilation shafts were roaring, suck- 
ing in the poisonous gases from the planet’s atmosphere 
which had infiltrated when my capsule had landed inside 
the Station. Empty, resembling a burst cocoon, the cigar- 
shaped capsule stood upright, enfolded by a calyx 
mounted on a steel base. The outer casing, scorched dur- 
ing flight, had turned a dirty brown. 

I went down a small stairway. The metal floor below had 
been coated with a heavy-duty plastic. In places, the 
wheels of trolleys carrying rockets had worn through this 
plastic covering to expose the bare steel beneath. 

The throbbing of the ventilators ceased abruptly and 
there was total silence. I looked around me, a little uncer- 
tain, waiting for someone to appear; but there was no sign 
of life. Only a neon arrow glowed, pointing towards a 
moving walkway which was silently unreeling. I allowed 
myself to be carried forward. 

The ceiling of the hall descended in a fine parabolic arc 
until it reached the entrance to a gallery, in whose re- 
cesses gas cylinders, gauges, parachutes, crates and a 
quantity of other objects were scattered about in untidy 
heaps. 

The moving walkway set me down at the far end of the 
gallery, on the threshold of a dome. Here there was an 
even greater disorder. A pool of oily liquid spread out 
from beneath a pile of oil-drums; a nauseating smell hung 


5 


in the air; footprints, in a series of glutinous smears, went 
off in all directions. The oil-drums were covered with a 
tangle of tickertape, torn paper and other waste. 

Another green arrow directed me to the central door. 
Behind this stretched a narrow corridor, hardly wide 
enough for two men to walk side by side, lit by slabs of 
glass let into the ceiling. Then another door, painted in 
green and white squares, which was ajar; I went in. 

The cabin had concave walls and a big panoramic win- 
dow, which a glowing mist had tinged with purple. Out- 
side the murky waves slid silently past. Open cupboards 
lined the walls, filled with instruments, books, dirty 
glasses, vacuum flasks — all covered with dust. Five or six 
small trolleys and some collapsible chairs cluttered up the 
stained floor. One chair alone was inflated, its back raised. 
In this armchair there was a little thin man, his face burnt 
by the sun, the skin on his nose and cheeks coming away 
in large flakes. I recognized him as Snow, a cybernetics 
expert and Gibarian’s deputy. In his time he had pub- 
lished articles of great originality in the Solarist Annual. 
It so happened that I had never had the opportunity of 
meeting him. He was wearing a mesh shirt which allowed 
the grey hairs of his sunken chest to poke through here 
and there, and canvas trousers with a great many pockets, 
mechanic’s trousers, which had once been white but now 
were stained at the knees and covered with holes from 
chemical burns. He was holding one of those pear-shaped 
plastic flasks which are used in spaceships not equipped 
with internal gravitational systems. Snow’s eyes widened 
in amazement as he looked up and saw me. The flask 
dropped from his fingers and bounced several times, 
spilling a few drops of transparent liquid. Blood drained 
from his face. I was too astonished to speak, and this 
dumbshow continued for so long that Snow’s terror grad- 
ually communicated itself to me. I took a step forward. He 
cringed in his chair. 

“Snow?” 

He quivered as though I had struck him. Gazing at me 
in indescribable horror, he gasped out: 

“I don’t know you . . .” His voice croaked. “I don’t know 
you . . . What do you want?” 


6 



The spilt liquid was quickly evaporating; I caught a 
whiff of alcohol. Had he been drinking? Was he drunk? 
What was he so terrified of? I stood in the middle of the 
room; my legs were trembling; my ears roared, as though 
they were stuffed with cotton wool. I had the impression 
that the ground was giving way beneath my feet. Beyond 
the curved window, the ocean rose and fell with regularity. 
Snow’s blood-shot eyes never left me. His terror seemed 
to have abated, but his expression of invincible disgust 
remained. 

“What’s the matter? Are you ill?” I whispered. 

“You seem worried,” he said, his voice hollow. “You 
actually seem worried ... So it’s like that now, is it? But 
why concern yourself about me? I don’t know you.” 

“Where’s Gibarian?” I asked. 

He gave a gasp and his glassy eyes lit up for an instant. 

“Gi . . .Giba . . .No! No!” 

His whole frame shook with stifled, hysterical laughter; 
then he seemed to calm down a little. 

“So it’s Gibarian you’ve come for, is it? Poor old 
Gibarian. What do you want with him?” 

His words, or rather his tone of voice, expressed hatred 
and defiance; it was as though I had suddenly ceased to 
represent a threat to him. 

Bewildered, I mumbled: 

“What. . . Where is he?” 

“Don’t you know?” 

Obviously he was drunk and raving. My anger rose. I 
should have controlled myself and left the room, but I had 
lost patience. I shouted: 

“That’s enough! How could I know where he is since 
I’ve only just arrived? Snow! What’s going on here?” 

His jaw dropped. Once again he caught his breath and 
his eyes gleamed with a different light. He seized the arms 
of his chair with both hands and stood up with difficulty. 
His knees were trembling. 

“What? You’ve just arrived. . . Where have you come 
from?” he asked, almost sober. 

“From Earth!” I retorted angrily. “Maybe you’ve heard 
of it? Not that anyone would ever guess it.” 

“From Earth? Good God! Then you must be Kelvin.” 


7 


“Of course. Why are you looking at me like that? What’s 
so startling about me?” 

He blinked rapidly. 

“Nothing,” he said, wiping his forehead, “nothing. 
Forgive me, Kelvin, it’s nothing, I assure you. I was simply 
surprised, I didn’t expect to see you.” 

“What do you mean, you didn’t expect to see me? You 
were notified months ago, and Moddard radioed only to- 
day from the Prometheus. ” 

“Yes; yes, indeed. Only, you see, we’re a bit disorgan- 
ized at the moment.” 

“So I see,” I answered dryly. 

Snow walked around me, inspecting my atmosphere 
suit, which was standard issue with the usual harness of 
wires and cables attached to the chest. He coughed, and 
rubbed his bony nose: 

“Perhaps you would like a bath? It would do you good. 
It’s the blue door, on the other side.” 

“Thanks — I know the Station lay-out.” 

“You must be hungry.” 

“No. Where’s Gibarian?” 

Without answering, he went over to the window. From 
behind he looked considerably older. His close-cropped 
hair was grey, and deep wrinkles creased his sunburnt 
neck. 

The wave-crests glinted through the window, the colos- 
sal rollers rising and falling in slow-motion. Watching the 
ocean like this one had the illusion — it was surely an illu- 
sion — that the Station was moving imperceptibly, as 
though teetering on an invisible base; then it would seem 
to recover its equilibrium, only to lean the opposite way 
with the same lazy movement. Thick foam, the color of 
blood, gathered in the troughs of the waves. For a fraction 
of a second, my throat tightened and I thought longingly 
of the Prometheus and its strict discipline; the memory of 
an existence which suddenly seemed a happy one, now 
gone for ever. 

Snow turned round, nervously rubbing his hands to- 
gether. 

“Listen,” he said abruptly, “except for me there’s no 


8 


one around for the moment. You’ll have to make do with 
my company for today. Call me Ratface; don’t argue. You 
know me by my photograph, just imagine we’re old 
friends. Everyone calls me Ratface, there’s nothing I can 
do about it.” 

Obstinately, I repeated my question: 

“Where is Gibarian?” 

He blinked again. 

“I’m sorry to have received you like that. It’s. . . it’s not 
exactly my fault. I had completely forgotten. . . A lot has 
been happening here, you see. . . ” 

“It’s all right. But what about Gibarian? Isn’t he on the 
Station? Is he on an observation flight?” 

Snow was gazing at a tangled mass of cables. 

“No, he hasn’t left the Station. And he won’t be flying. 
The fact is. . . ” 

My ears were still blocked, and I was finding it more and 
more difficult to hear. 

“What? What do you mean? Where is he then?” 

‘ I should think you might guess,” he answered in a 
changed voice, looking me coldly in the eyes. I shivered. 
He was drunk, but he knew what he was saying. 

“There’s been an accident?” 

He nodded vigorously, watching my reactions closely. 

“When?” 7 

“This morning, at dawn.” 

By now, my sensations were less violent; this succinct 
exchange of questions and answers had calmed me. I was 
beginning to understand Snow’s strange behavior. 

“What kind of accident?” 

“Why not go to your cabin and take off your spacesuit? 
Come back in, say, an hour’s time.” 

I hesitated. 

“All right,” I said finally. 

As I made to leave, he called me back. 

“Wait!” He had an uneasy look, as if he wanted to add 
something but was finding it difficult to bring out the 
words. After a pause, he said: 

“There used to be three of us here. Now, with you, 
there are three of us again. Do you know Sartorius?” 


9 


“In the same way as I knew you — only from his photo- 
graphs.” 

“He’s up there, in the laboratory, and I doubt if he’ll 
come down before dark, but. . . In any case, you’ll recog- 
nize him. If you should see anyone else — someone who 
isn’t me or Sartorius, you understand, then. . . ” 

“Then what?” 

I must be dreaming. All this could only be a dream! The 
inky waves, their crimson gleams under the low-hanging 
sun, and this little man who had gone back to his arm- 
chair, sitting there as before, hanging his head and star- 
ing at the heap of cables. 

“In that case, do nothing.” 

“Who could I see?” I flared up. “A ghost?” 

“You think I’m mad, of course. No, no, I’m not mad. I 
can’t say anything more for the moment. Perhaps. . . who 
knows?. . . Nothing will happen. But don’t forget I warned 
you.” 

“Don’t be so mysterious. What’s all this about?” 

“Keep a hold on yourself. Be prepared to meet. . . 
anything. It sounds impossible I know, but try. It’s the 
only advice I can give you. I can’t think of anything bet- 
ter.” 

“But what could I possibly meet?” I shouted. 

Seeing him sitting there, looking sideways at me, his 
sunburnt face drooping with fatigue, I found it difficult to 
contain myself. I wanted to grab him by the shoulders and 
shake him. 

Painfully, dragging the words out one by one, he an- 
swered: 

“I don’t know. In a way, it depends on you.” 

“Hallucinations, you mean?” 

“No. . . it’s real enough. Don’t attack. Whatever you do, 
remember that!” 

“What are you getting at?” I could hardly recognize the 
sound of my own voice. 

“We’re not on Earth, you know.” 

“A Polytherian form?” I shouted. “There’s nothing hu- 
man about them!” 

I was about to rush at him, to drag him out of the trance, 


10 


prompted, apparently, by his crazy theories, when he 
murmured: 

“That’s why they’re so dangerous. Remember what I’ve 
told you, and be on your guard!” 

“What happened to Gibarian?” 

He did not answer. 

“What is Sartorius doing?” 

“Come back in an hour.” 

I turned and went out. As I closed the door behind me, 
I took a last look at him. Tiny, shrunken, his head in his 
hands and his elbows resting on his stained knees, he sat 
there, motionless. It was only then that I noticed the dried 
bloodstains on the backs of his hands. 


The Solarists 


In the empty corridor I stood for a moment in front of the 
closed door. I noticed a strip of plaster carelessly stuck on 
one of the panels. Pencilled on it was the word “Man!” At 
the sight of this faintly scribbled word, I had a sudden 
longing to return to Snow for company; but I thought 
better of it. 

His crazy warnings still ringing in my ears, I started off 
down the narrow, tubular passage which was filled with the 
moaning of the wind, my shoulders bowed under the 
weight of the spacesuit. On tip-toe, half-consciously flee- 
ing from some invisible watcher, I found two doors on my 
left and two more on my right. I read the occupants’ 
names: Dr. Gibarian, Dr. Snow, Dr. Sartorius. On the 
fourth, there was no nameplate. I hesitated, then pressed 
the handle down gently and slowly opened the door. As I 
did so, I had a premonition, amounting almost to a cer- 
tainty, that there was someone inside. I went in. 

There was no one. Another wide panoramic window, 
almost as large as the one in the cabin where I had found 
Snow, overhung the ocean, which, sunlit on this side, 
shone with an oleaginous gleam, as though the waves 
secreted a reddish oil. A crimson glow pervaded the 
whole room, whose lay-out suggested a ship’s cabin. On 
one side, flanked by book-filled shelves, a retractable bed 


12 



stood against the wall. On the other, between the numer- 
ous lockers, hung nickel frames enclosing a series of 
aerial photographs stuck end to end with adhesive tape, 
and racks full of test-tubes and retorts plugged with cot- 
ton-wool. Two tiers of white enamel boxes took up the 
space beneath the window. I lifted some of the lids; the 
boxes were crammed with all kinds of instruments, inter- 
twined with plastic tubing. The corners of the room were 
occupied by a refrigerator, a tap and a demisting device. 
For lack of space on the big table by the window, a micro- 
scope stood on the floor. Turning round, I saw a tall 
locker beside the entrance door. It was half-open, filled 
with atmosphere suits, laboratory smocks, insulated 
aprons, underclothing, boots for planetary exploration, 
and aluminium cylinders: portable oxygen gear. Two sets 
of this equipment, complete with masks, hung down from 
one of the knobs of the vertical bed. Everywhere there was 
the same chaos, a general disorder which someone had 
made a hasty attempt to disguise. I sniffed the air. I could 
detect a faint smell of chemical reagents and traces of 
something more acrid— chlorine? Instinctively I searched 
the ceiling for the grills over the air-vents: strips of paper 
attached to the bars were fluttering gently; the air was 
circulating normally. In order to make a relatively free 
space around the bed, between the bookshelves and the 
locker, I cleared two chairs of their litter of books, instru- 
ments, and tools, which I piled haphazardly on the other 
side of the room. 

I pulled out a bracket to hang up my spacesuit, took 
hold of the zip-fastener, then let go again. Deterred by the 
confused idea that I was depriving myself of a shield, I 
could not bring myself to remove it. Once more I looked 
round the room. I checked that the door was shut tight 
and that it had no lock, and after a brief hesitation I 
dragged some of the heaviest boxes to the doorway. Hav- 
ing built this temporary barricade, I freed myself from my 
clanking armor in three quick movements. A narrow 
looking-glass, built into the locker door, reflected part of 
the room, and out of the corner of my eye I caught sight 
of something moving. I jumped, but it was only my own 


13 


reflection. Underneath the spacesuit, my overalls were 
drenched with sweat. I took them off and pulled back a 
sliding door, revealing the bright-tiled walls of a small 
bathroom. A long, flat box lay in the hollow at the base of 
the shower; I carried it into the room. As I put it down, 
the springlid flew up and disclosed a number of compart- 
ments filled with strange objects: mis-shapen forms in a 
dark metal, grotesque replicas of the instruments in the 
racks. Not one of the tools was usable; they were blunted, 
distorted, melted, as though they had been in a furnace. 
Strangest of all, even the porcelain handles, virtually in- 
combustible, were twisted out of shape. Even at maximum 
temperature, no laboratory furnace could have melted 
them; only, perhaps, an atomic pile. I took a Geiger coun- 
ter from the pocket on my spacesuit, but when I held it 
over the debris, it remained dumb. 

By now I was wearing nothing but my underwear. I tore 
it off, flung it across the room and dashed under the 
shower. The shock of the water did me good. Turning 
beneath the scalding, needle-sharp jets, I scrubbed myself 
vigorously, splashing the walls, expelling, eradicating 
from my skin the thick scum of morbid apprehensions 
which had pervaded me since my arrival. 

I rummaged in the locker and found a work-suit which 
could also be worn under an atmosphere suit. As I pock- 
eted my few belongings, I felt something hard tucked 
between the pages of my notebook: it was a key, the key 
to my apartment, down there on Earth. Absently, I turned 
it over in my fingers. Finally I put it down on the table. It 
occurred to me suddenly that I might need a weapon. An 
all-purpose pocket-knife was hardly sufficient for my 
needs, but I had nothing else, and I was not going to start 
searching for a gamma pistol or something else of the 
kind. 

I sat down on a tubular stool in the middle of the clear 
space, glad to be alone, and seeing with satisfaction that 
I had over half an hour to myself. (By nature, I have always 
been scrupulous about keeping engagements, whether 
important or trivial.) The hands of the clock, its face di- 
vided into twenty-four hours, pointed to seven o’clock. 


14 


The sun was setting. 07.00 hours here was 20.00 hours on 
board the Prometheus. On Moddard’s screens, Solaris 
would be nothing but an indistinct dust-cloud, mingled 
with the stars. But what did the Prometheus matter to me 
now? I closed my eyes. I could hear no sound except the 
moaning of the ventilation pipes and a faint trickling of 
water from the bathroom. 

If I had understood correctly, it was only a short time 
since Gibarian had died. What had they done with his 
body? Had they buried it? No, that was impossible on this 
planet. I puzzled over the question for a long time, con- 
centrating on the fate of the corpse; then, realizing the 
absurdity of my thoughts, I began to pace up and down. 
My toe knocked against a canvas bag half-buried under a 
pile of books; I bent down and picked it up. It contained 
a small bottle made of colored glass, so light that it might 
have been blown out of paper. I held it up to the window 
in the purplish glow of the somber twilight, now overhung 
by a sooty fog. What was I doing, allowing myself to be 
distracted by irrelevancies, by the first trifle which came 
to hand? 

I gave a start: the lights had gone on, activated by a 
photo-electric relay; the sun had set. What would happen 
next? I was so tense that the sensation of an empty space 
behind me became unbearable. In an attempt to pull my- 
self together, I took a chair over to the bookshelves and 
chose a book familiar to me: the second volume of the 
early monograph by Hughes and Eugel, Historia Solaris. I 
rested the thick, solidly bound volume on my knees and 
began leafing through the pages. 

The discovery of Solaris dated from about 100 years 
before I was born. 

The planet orbits two suns: a red sun and a blue sun. 
For 45 years after its discovery, no spacecraft had visited 
Solaris. At that time, the Gamow-Shapley theory — that life 
was impossible on planets which are satellites of two solar 
bodies — was firmly believed. The orbit is constantly being 
modified by variations in the gravitational pull in the 
course of its revolutions around the two suns. 

Due to these fluctuations in gravity, the orbit is either 


15 


flattened or distended and the elements of life, if they 
appear, are inevitably destroyed, either by intense heat or 
an extreme drop in temperature. These changes take 
place at intervals estimated in millions of years — very 
short intervals, that is, according to the laws of astronomy 
and biology (evolution takes hundreds of millions of years 
if not a billion). 

According to the earliest calculations, in 500,000 years’ 
time Solaris would be drawn one half of an astronomic 
unit nearer to its red sun, and a million years after that 
would be engulfed by the incandescent star. 

A few decades later, however, observations seemed to 
suggest that the planet’s orbit was in no way subject to the 
expected variations: it was stable, as stable as the orbit of 
the planets in our own solar system. 

The observations and calculations were reworked with 
great precision; they simply confirmed the original con- 
clusions: Solaris’s orbit was unstable. 

A modest item among the hundreds of planets discov- 
ered annually — to which official statistics devoted only a 
few lines defining the characteristics of their orbits — 
Solaris eventually began to attract special attention and 
attain a high rank. 

Four years after this promotion, overflying the planet 
with the Laakon and two auxiliary craft, the Ottenskjold 
expedition undertook a study of Solaris. This expedition 
being in the nature of a preliminary, not to say improvised 
reconnaissance, the scientists were not equipped for a 
landing. Ottenskjold placed a quantity of automatic ob- 
servation satellites into equatorial and polar orbit, their 
principal function being to measure the gravitational pull. 
In addition, a study was made of the planet’s surface, 
which is covered by an ocean dotted with innumerable 
flat, low-lying islands whose combined area is less than 
that of Europe, although the diameter of Solaris is a fifth 
greater than Earth’s. These expanses of barren, rocky 
territory, irregularly distributed, are largely concentrated 
in the southern hemisphere. At the same time the compo- 
sition of the atmosphere — devoid of oxygen — was 
analyzed, and precise measurements made of the planet’s 


16 


density, from which its albedo and other astronomical 
characteristics were determined. As was foreseeable, no 
trace of life was discovered, either on the islands or in the 
ocean. 

During the following ten years, Solaris became the cen- 
ter of attraction for all observatories concerned with the 
study of this region of space, for the planet had in the 
meantime shown the astonishing faculty of maintaining 
an orbit which ought, without any shadow of doubt, to 
have been unstable. The problem almost developed into 
a scandal: since the results of the observations could only 
be inaccurate, attempts were made (in the interests of 
science) to denounce and discredit various scientists or 
else the computers they used. 

Lack of funds delayed the departure of a proper Solaris 
expedition for three years. Finally Shannahan assembled 
his team and obtained three C-tonnage vessels from the 
Institute, the largest starships of the period. A year and 
a half before the arrival of the expedition, which left from 
the region of Alpha in Aquarius, a second exploration 
fleet, acting in the name of the Institute, placed an auto- 
matic satellite — Luna 247 — into orbit around Solaris. 
This satellite, after three successive reconstructions at 
roughly ten-year intervals, is still functioning today. The 
data it supplied confirmed beyond doubt the findings of 
the Ottenskjold expedition concerning the active charac- 
ter of the ocean’s movements. 

One of Shannahan’s ships remained in orbit, while the 
two others, after some preliminary attempts, landed in the 
southern hemisphere, in a rocky area about 600 miles 
square. The work of the expedition lasted eighteen 
months and was carried out under favorable conditions, 
apart from an unfortunate accident brought about by the 
malfunction of some apparatus. In the meantime, the 
scientists had split into two opposing camps; the bone of 
contention was the ocean. On the basis of the analyses, it 
had been accepted that the ocean was an organic forma- 
tion (at that time, no one had yet dared to call it living). 
But, while the biologists considered it as a primitive for- 
mation — a sort of gigantic entity, a fluid cell, unique and 


17 


monstrous (which they called ‘prebiological’), surround- 
ing the globe with a colloidal envelope several miles thick 
in places — the astronomers and physicists asserted that it 
must be an organic structure, extraordinarily evolved. Ac- 
cording to them, the ocean possibly exceeded terrestrial 
organic structures in complexity, since it was capable of 
exerting an active influence on the planet’s orbital path. 
Certainly, no other factor could be found that might ex- 
plain the behavior of Solaris; moreover, the planeto- 
physicists had established a relationship between certain 
processes of the plasmic ocean and the local measure- 
ments of gravitational pull, which altered according to the 
‘matter transformations’ of the ocean. 

Consequently it was the physicists, rather than the bi- 
ologists, who put forward the paradoxical formulation of 
a ‘plasmic mechanism,’ implying by this a structure, pos- 
sibly without life as we conceive it, but capable of per-, 
forming functional activities — on an astronomic scale,it 
should be emphasized. 

It was during this quarrel, whose reverberations soon 
reached the ears of the most eminent authorities, that the 
Gamow-Shapley doctrine, unchallenged for eighty years, 
was shaken for the first time. 

There were some who continued to support the Ga- 
mow-Shapley contentions, to the effect that the ocean had 
nothing to do with life, that it was neither ‘parabiological’ 
nor ‘prebiological’ but a geological formation — of ex- 
treme rarity, it is true — with the unique ability to stabilize 
the orbit of Solaris, despite the variations in the forces of 
attraction. Le Chatelier’s law was enlisted in support of 
this argument. 

To challenge this conservative attitude, new hypotheses 
were advanced — of which Civito-Vitta’s was one of the 
most elaborate — proclaiming that the ocean was the 
product of a dialectical development: on the basis of its 
earliest pre-oceanic form, a solution of slow-reacting 
chemical elements, and by the force of circumstances (the 
threat to its existence from the changes of orbit), it had 
reached in a single bound the stage of ‘homeostatic 
ocean,’ without passing through all the stages of terres- 


18 


trial evolution, by-passing the unicellular and multicellu- 
lar phases, the vegetable and the animal, the development 
of a nervous and cerebral system. In other words, unlike 
terrestrial organisms, it had not taken hundreds of mil- 
lions of years to adapt itself to its environment — cul- 
minating in the first representatives of a species endowed 
with reason — but dominated its environment immedi- 
ately. 

This was an original point of view. Nevertheless, the 
means whereby this colloidal envelope was able to stabil- 
ize the planet’s orbit remained unknown. For almost a 
century, devices had existed capable of creating artificial 
magnetic and gravitational fields; they were called gravit- 
ors. But no one could even guess how this formless glue 
could produce an effect which the gravitors achieved by 
the use of complicated nuclear reactions and enormously 
high temperatures. The newspapers of the day, exciting 
the curiosity of the layman and the anger of the scientist, 
were full of the most improbable embroideries on the 
theme of the ‘Solaris Mystery,’ one reporter going so far 
as to suggest that the ocean was, no less, a distant relation 
to our electric eels! 

Just when a measure of success had been achieved in 
unravelling this problem, it turned out, as often happened 
subsequently in the field of Solarist studies, that the expla- 
nation replaced one enigma by another, perhaps even 
more baffling. 

Observations showed, at least, that the ocean did not 
react according to the same principles as our gravitors 
(which, in any case, would have been impossible), but 
succeeded in controlling the orbital periodicity directly. 
One result, among others, was the discovery of discrep- 
ancies in the measurement of time along one and the 
same meridian on Solaris. Thus the ocean was not only in 
a sense “aware” of the Einstein-Boevia theory; it was also 
capable of exploiting the implications of the latter (which 
was more than we could say of ourselves). 

With the publication of this hypothesis, the scientific 
world was torn by one of the most violent controversies 
of the century. Revered and universally accepted theories 


19 


foundered; the specialist literature was swamped by out- 
rageous and heretical treatises; ‘sentient ocean’ or ‘gravi- 
ty-controlling colloid’ — the debate became a burning 
issue. 

All this happened several years before I was born. 
When I was a student — new data having accumulated in 
the meantime — it was already generally agreed that there 
was life on Solaris, even if it was limited to a single inhabi- 
tant. 

The second volume of Hughes and Eugel, which I was 
still leafing through mechanically, began with a systemati- 
zation that was as ingenious as it was amusing. The table 
of classification comprised three definitions: Type: Po- 
lythera; Class: Syncytialia; Category: Metamorph. 

It might have been thought that we knew of an infinite 
number of examples of the species, whereas in reality 
there was only the one — weighing, it is true, some seven 
hundred billion tons. 

Multicolored illustrations, picturesque graphs, analyti- 
cal summaries and spectral diagrams flickered through 
my fingers, explaining the type and rhythm of the funda- 
mental transformations as well as the chemical reactions. 
Rapidly, infallibly, the thick tome led the reader on to the 
solid ground of mathematical certitude. One might have 
assumed that we knew everything there was to be known 
about this representative of the category Metamorph, 
which lay some hundreds of metres below the metal hull 
of the Station, obscured at the moment by the shadows of 
the four-hour night. 

In fact, by no means everybody was yet convinced that 
the ocean was actually a living ‘creature,’ and still less, it 
goes without saying, a rational one. I put the heavy volume 
back on the shelf and took up the one next to it, which was 
in two parts. The first part was devoted to a resume of the 
countless attempts to establish contact with the ocean. I 
could well remember how, when I was a student, these 
attempts were the subject of endless anecdotes, jokes and 
witticisms. Compared with the proliferation of specula- 
tive ideas which were triggered off by this problem, medi- 
eval scholasticism seemed a model of scientific 


20 


enlightenment. The second part, nearly 1500 pages long, 
was devoted exclusively to the bibliography of the subject. 
There would not have been enough room for the books 
themselves in the cabin in which I was sitting. 

The first attempts at contact were by means of specially 
designed electronic apparatus. The ocean itself took an 
active part in these operations by remodelling the instru- 
ments. All this, however, remained somewhat obscure. 
What exactly did the ocean’s ‘participation’ consist of? It 
modified certain elements in the submerged instruments, 
as a result of which the normal discharge frequency was 
completely disrupted and the recording instruments reg- 
istered a profusion of signals — fragmentary indications 
of some outlandish activity, which in fact defeated all at- 
tempts at analysis. Did these data point to a momentary 
condition of stimulation, or to regular impulses cor- 
related with the gigantic structures which the ocean was 
in the process of creating elsewhere, at the antipodes of 
the region under investigation? Had the electronic ap- 
paratus recorded the cryptic manifestation of the ocean’s 
ancient secrets? Had it revealed its innermost workings to 
us? Who could tell? No two reactions to the stimuli were 
the same. Sometimes the instruments almost exploded 
under the violence of the impulses, sometimes there was 
total silence; it was impossible to obtain a repetition of 
any previously observed phenomenon. Constantly, it 
seemed, the experts were on the brink of deciphering the 
ever-growing mass of information. Was it not, after all, 
with this object in mind that computers had been built of 
virtually limitless capacity, such as no previous problem 
had ever demanded? 

And, indeed, some results were obtained. The ocean as 
a source of electric and magnetic impulses and of gravita- 
tion expressed itself in a more or less mathematical lan- 
guage. Also, by calling on the most abstruse branches of 
statistical analysis, it was possible to classify certain fre- 
quencies in the discharges of current. Structural homo- 
logues were discovered, not unlike those already 
observed by physicists in that sector of science which 
deals with the reciprocal interaction of energy and matter. 


21 


elements and compounds, the finite and the infinite. This 
correspondence convinced the scientists that they were 
confronted with a monstrous entity endowed with reason, 
a protoplasmic ocean-brain enveloping the entire planet 
and idling its time away in extravagant theoretical cogni- 
tation about the nature of the universe. Our instruments 
had intercepted minute random fragments of a prodi- 
gious and everlasting monologue unfolding in the depths 
of this colossal brain, which was inevitably beyond our 
understanding. 

So much for the mathematicians. These hypotheses, 
according to some people, underestimated the resources 
of the human mind; they bowed to the unknown, pro- 
claiming the ancient doctrine, arrogantly resurrected, of 
ignoramus et ignorabimus. Others regarded the mathemati- 
cians’ hypotheses as sterile and dangerous nonsense, 
contributing towards the creation of a modern mythology 
based on the notion of this giant brain — whether plasmic 
or electronic was immaterial — as the ultimate objective of 
existence, the very synthesis of life. 

Yet others. . . but the would-be experts were legion and 
each had his own theory. A comparison of the ‘contact’ 
school of thought with other branches of Solarist studies, 
in which specialization had rapidly developed, especially 
during the last quarter of a century, made it clear that a 
Solarist-cybernetician had difficulty in making himself un- 
derstood to a Solarist-symmetriadologist. Veubeke, di- 
rector of the Institute when I was studying there, had 
asked jokingly one day: “How do you expect to communi- 
cate with the ocean, when you can’t even understand one 
another?” The jest contained more than a grain of truth. 

The decision to categorize the ocean as a metamorph 
was not an arbitrary one. Its undulating surface was capa- 
ble of generating extremely diverse formations which 
resembled nothing ever seen on Earth, and the function 
of these sudden eruptions of plasmic ‘creativity,’ whether 
adaptive, explorative or what, remained an enigma. 

Lifting the heavy volume with both hands, I replaced it 
on the shelf, and thought to myself that our scholarship, 
all the information accumulated in the libraries. 


22 



amounted to a useless jumble of words, a sludge of state- 
ments and suppositions, and that we had not progressed 
an inch in the 78 years since researches had begun. The 
situation seemed much worse now than in the time of the 
pioneers, since the assiduous efforts of so many years had 
not resulted in a single indisputable conclusion. 

The sum total of known facts was strictly negative. The 
ocean did not use machines, even though in certain cir- 
cumstances it seemed capable of creating them. During 
the first two years of exploratory work, it had reproduced 
elements of some of the submerged instruments. There- 
after, it simply ignored the experiments we went on pur- 
suing, as though it had lost all interest in our instruments 
and our activities — as though, indeed, it was no longer 
interested in us. It did not possess a nervous system (to 
go on with the inventory of ‘negative knowledge’) or cells, 
and its structure was not proteiform. It did not always 
react even to the most powerful stimuli (it ignored com- 
pletely, for example, the catastrophic accident which oc- 
curred during the second Giese expedition: an auxiliary 
rocket, falling from a height of 300,000 metres, crashed 
on the planet’s surface and the radioactive explosion of its 
nuclear reserves destroyed the plasma within a radius of 
2500 metres). 

Gradually, in scientific circles, the ‘Solaris Affair’ came 
to be regarded as a lost cause, notably among the ad- 
ministrators of the Institute, where voices had recently 
been raised suggesting that financial support should be 
withdrawn and research suspended. No one, until then, 
had dared to suggest the final liquidation of the Station; 
such a decision would have smacked too obviously of de- 
feat. But in the course of semi-official discussions a num- 
ber of scientists recommended an ‘honorable’ withdrawal 
from Solaris. 

Many people in the world of science, however, espe- 
cially among the young, had unconsciously come to re- 
gard the ‘affair’ as a touchstone of individual values. All 
things considered, they claimed, it was not simply a ques- 
tion of penetrating Solarist civilization, it was essentially 
a test of ourselves, of the limitations of human knowledge. 


23 


For some time, there was a widely held notion (zealously 
fostered by the daily press) to the effect that the ‘thinking 
ocean’ of Solaris was a gigantic brain, prodigiously well- 
developed and several million years in advance of our own 
civilization, a sort of ‘cosmic yogi,’ a sage, a symbol of 
omniscience, which had long ago understood the vanity of 
all action and for this reason had retreated into an un- 
breakable silence. The notion was incorrect, for the living 
ocean was active. Not, it is true, according to human ideas 
— it did not build cities or bridges, nor did it manufacture 
flying machines. It did not try to reduce distances, nor was 
it concerned with the conquest of Space (the ultimate 
criterion, some people thought, of man’s superiority). But 
it was engaged in a never-ending process of transforma- 
tion, an ‘ontological autometamorphosis.’ (There were 
any amount of scientific neologisms in accounts of Sola- 
rist activities.) Moreover, any scientist who devotes him- 
self to the study of Solariana has the indelible impression 
that he can discern fragments of an intelligent structure, 
perhaps endowed with genius, haphazardly mingled with 
outlandish phenomena, apparently the product of an un- 
hinged mind. Thus was born the conception of the ‘autis- 
tic ocean’ as opposed to the ‘ocean-yogi.’ 

These hypotheses resurrected one of the most ancient 
of philosophical problems: the relation between matter 
and mind, and between mind and consciousness. Du 
Haart was the first to have the audacity to maintain that the 
ocean possessed a consciousness. The problem, which 
the methodologists hastened to dub metaphysical, pro- 
voked all kinds of arguments and discussions. Was it pos- 
sible for thought to exist without consciousness? Could 
one, in any case, apply the word thought to the processes 
observed in the ocean? Is a mountain only a huge stone? 
Is a planet an enormous mountain? Whatever the ter- 
minology, the new scale of size introduced new norms 
and new phenomena. 

The question appeared as a contemporary version of 
the problem of squaring the circle. Every independent 
thinker endeavored to register his personal contribution 
to the hoard of Solarist studies. New theories prolifer- 
ated: the ocean was evidence of a state of degeneration, 


24 


of regression, following a phase of ‘intellectual repletion;’ 
it was a deviant neoplasm, the product of the bodies of 
former inhabitants of the planet, whom it had devoured, 
swallowed up, dissolving and blending the residue into 
this unchanging, self-propagating form, supracellular in 
structure. 

By the white light of the fluorescent tubes — a pale imita- 
tion of terrestrial daylight — I cleared the table of its clut- 
ter of apparatus and books. Arms outstretched and my 
hands gripping the chromium edging, I unrolled a map of 
Solaris on the plastic surface and studied it at length. The 
living ocean had its peaks and its canyons. Its islands, 
which were covered with a decomposing mineral deposit, 
were certainly related to the nature of the ocean bed. But 
did it control the eruption and subsidence of the rocky 
formations buried in its depths? No one knew. Gazing at 
the big flat projection of the two hemispheres, colored in 
various tones of blue and purple, I experienced once 
again that thrill of wonder which had so often gripped me, 
and which I had felt as a schoolboy on learning of the 
existence of Solaris for the first time. 

Lost in contemplation of this bewildering map, my 
mind in a daze, I temporarily forgot the mystery sur- 
rounding Gibarian’s death and the uncertainty of my own 
future. 

The different sections of the ocean were named after 
the scientists who had explored them. I was examining 
Thexall’s swell, which surrounded the equatorial ar- 
chipelagos, when I had a sudden sensation of being 
watched. 

I was still leaning over the map, but I no longer saw it; 
my limbs were in the grip of a sort of paralysis. The crates 
and a small locker still barricaded the door, which was in 
front of me. It’s only a robot, I told myself— yet I had not 
discovered any in the room and none could have entered 
without my knowledge. My back and my neck seemed to 
be on fire; the sensation of this relentless, fixed stare was 
becoming unbearable. With my head shrinking between 
my hunched shoulders, I leant harder and harder against 
the table, until it began slowly to slide away. The move- 
ment released me; I spun round. 


25 


The room was empty. There was nothing in front of me 
except the wide convex window and, beyond it, the night. 
But the same sensation persisted. The night stared me in 
the face, amorphous, blind, infinite, without frontiers. 
Not a single star relieved the darkness behind the glass. 
I pulled the thick curtains. I had been in the Station less 
than an hour, yet already I was showing signs of morbid- 
ity. Was it the effect of Gibarian’s death? In so far as I 
knew him, I had imagined that nothing could shake his 
nerve: now, I was no longer so sure. 

I stood in the middle of the room, beside the table. My 
breathing became more regular, I felt the sweat chill on 
my forehead. What was it I had been thinking about a 
moment ago? Ah, yes, robots! It was surprising that I had 
not come across one anywhere on the Station. What could 
have become of them all? The only one with which I had 
been in contact — at a distance — belonged to the vehicle 
reception services. But what about the others? 

I looked at my watch. It was time to rejoin Snow. 

I left the room. The dome was feebly lit by luminous 
filaments running the length of the ceiling. I went up to 
Gibarian’s door and stood there, motionless. There was 
total silence. I gripped the handle. I had in fact no inten- 
tion of going in, but the handle went down and the door 
opened, disclosing a chink of darkness. The lights went 
on. In one quick movement, I entered and silently closed 
the door behind me. Then I turned round. 

My shoulders brushed against the door panels. The 
room was larger than mine. A curtain decorated with little 
pink and blue flowers (not regulation Station equipment, 
but no doubt brought from Earth with his personal be- 
longings) covered three-quarters of the panoramic win- 
dow. Around the walls were book-shelves and cupboards, 
painted pale green with silvery highlights. Both shelves 
and cupboards had been emptied of their contents, which 
were piled into heaps, amongst the furniture. At my feet, 
blocking the way, were two overturned trolleys buried 
beneath a heap of periodicals spilling out of bulging brief 
cases which had burst open. Books with their pages 
splayed out fanwise were stained with colored liquids 


26 


which had spilt from broken retorts and bottles with cor- 
roded stoppers, receptacles made of such thick glass that 
a single fall, even from a considerable height, could not 
have shattered them in such a way. Beneath the window lay 
an overturned desk, an anglepoise lamp crumpled under- 
neath it; two legs of an upturned stool were stuck in the 
half-open drawers. A flood of papers of every conceivable 
size swamped the floor. My interest quickened as I recog- 
nized Gibarian’s hand-writing. As I stooped to gather 
together the loose sheets, I noticed that my hand was 
casting a double shadow. 

I straightened up. The pink curtain glowed brightly, 
traversed by a streak of incandescent, steely-blue light 
which was gradually widening. I pulled the curtain aside. 
An unbearable glare extended along the horizon, chasing 
before it an army of spectral shadows, which rose up from 
among the waves and dispersed in the direction of the 
Station. It was the dawn. After an hour of darkness the 
planet’s second sun — the blue sun — was rising in the sky. 

The automatic switch cut off the lights as I returned to 
the heap of papers. The first thing I came across was a 
detailed description of an experiment, evidently decided 
upon three weeks before. Gibarian had planned to expose 
the plasma to an intensive bombardment of X-rays. I 
gathered from the context that the paper was addressed 
to Sartorius, whose job it was to organize operations. 
What I was holding in my hand was a copy of the plan. 

The whiteness of the paper hurt my eyes. This new day 
was different from the previous one. In the warm glow of 
the red sun, mists overhung a black ocean with blood-red 
reflections, and waves, clouds and sky were almost con- 
stantly veiled in a crimson haze. Now, the blue sun 
pierced the flower-printed curtain with a crystalline light. 
My suntanned hands looked grey. The room had 
changed; all the red-reflecting objects had lost their luster 
and had turned a greyish-brown, whereas those which 
were white, green and yellow had acquired a vivid bril- 
liance and seemed to give off their own light. Screwing up 
my eyes, I risked another glance through a chink in the 
curtain: an expanse of molten metal trembled and shim- 


27 


mered under a white-hot sky. I shut my eyes and drew 
back. On the shelf above the wash-basin (which had re- 
cently been badly chipped) I found a pair of dark glasses, 
so big that when I put them on they covered half my face. 
The curtain appeared to glow with a sodium light. I went 
on reading, picking up the sheets of paper and arranging 
them on the only usable table. There were gaps in the text, 
and I searched in vain for the missing pages. 

I came across a report of experiments already carried 
out, and learned that, for four days running, Gibarian and 
Sartorius had submitted the ocean to radiation at a point 
1400 miles from the present position of the Station. The 
use of X-rays was banned by a UN convention, because of 
their harmful effects, and I was certain that no one had 
sent a request to Earth for authorization to proceed with 
such experiments. 

Looking up, I caught sight of my face in the mirror of 
a half-open locker door: masked by the dark glasses, it was 
deathly pale. The room, too, glinting with blue and white 
reflections, looked equally bizarre; but soon there came a 
prolonged screech of metal as the air-tight outer shutters 
slid across the window. There was an instant of darkness, 
and then the lights came on; they seemed to me to be 
curiously dim. It grew hotter and hotter. The regular 
drone of the air-conditioning was now a high-pitched 
whine: the Station’s refrigeration plant was running at full 
capacity. Nevertheless, the overpowering heat grew more 
and more intense. 

I heard footsteps. Someone was walking through the 
dome. In two silent strides, I reached the door. The foot- 
steps slowed down; whoever it was was behind it. The 
handle moved. Automatically, without thinking, I gripped 
it. The pressure did not increase, but nor did it relax. 
Neither of us, on either side of the door, said a word. We 
remained there, motionless, each of us holding the han- 
dle. Suddenly it straightened up again, freeing itself from 
my grasp. The muffled footsteps receded. With my ear 
glued to the panel, I went on listening. I heard nothing 
more. 


28 


The Visitors 


I hastily pocketed Gibarian’s notes and went over to the 
locker. Work-suits and clothes had been pushed to one 
side as though someone had hidden himself at the back. 
On the floor I saw the corner of an envelope sticking out 
from a heap of papers and picked it up. It was addressed 
to me. Dry-mouthed with apprehension, I tore it open; I 
had to force myself to unfold the note inside. 

In his even handwriting, small but perfectly legible, 
Gibarian had written two lines: 

Supplement Dir. Solar. Vol 1.: Vot. Separat. 

Messenger ds aff. F.; Ravintzer: The Little Apocrypha. 

That was all, not another word. Did these two lines 
contain some vital piece of information? When had he 
written them? I told myself that the first thing to do was 
to consult the library index. I knew the supplement to the 
first volume of the annual of Solarist studies; or rather, 
without having read it, I knew of its existence — but was it 
not a document of purely historical interest? As for Ra- 
vintzer and The Little Apocrypha, I had never heard of them. 

What next? 

I was already a quarter of an hour late for my meeting 
with Snow. With my back to the door, I looked the room 
over carefully once more. Only then did I notice the bed 
standing up against the wall, half concealed by a large map 


29 


of Solaris. Something was hanging down behind the map; 
it was a pocket tape-recorder, and I noted that nine tenths 
of the tape had been used. I took the machine out of its 
case (which I hung back where I had found it) and slipped 
it into my pocket. 

Before leaving, I listened intently with my eyes closed. 
There was no sound from outside. I opened the door on 
to a yawning gulf of darkness — until it occurred to me to 
remove my dark glasses. The dome was feebly lit by the 
glowing filaments in the ceiling. 

A number of corridors spread out in a star-shaped pat- 
tern between the four doors of the sleeping quarters and 
the narrow passage leading to the radio-cabin. Suddenly, 
looming up in the opening which led to the communal 
bathroom, a tall silhouette appeared, barely distinguisha- 
ble in the surrounding gloom. I stood stock still, frozen 
to the spot. A giant Negress was coming silently towards 
me with a smooth, rolling gait. I caught a gleam from the 
whites of her eyes and heard the soft slapping of her bare 
feet. She was wearing nothing but a yellow skirt of plaited 
straw; her enormous breasts swung freely and her black 
arms were as thick as thighs. Less than a yard separated 
us as she passed me, but she did not give me so much as 
a glance. She went on her way, her grass skirt swinging 
rhythmically, resembling one of those steatopygous stat- 
ues in anthropological museums. She opened Gibarian’s 
door and on the threshold her silhouette stood out dis- 
tinctly against the bright light from inside the room. Then 
she closed the door behind her and I was alone. 

Terror-stricken, I stared blankly round the big, empty 
hall. What had happened? What had I seen? Suddenly, my 
mind reeled as I recalled Snow’s warnings. Who was this 
monstrous Aphrodite? I took a step, a single pace, in the 
direction of Gibarian’s room, but I knew perfectly well 
that I would not go in. 

I do not know how long I remained leaning against the 
cool metal wall, hearing nothing except the distant, 
monotonous whine of the air-conditioners. Eventually I 
pulled myself together and made my way to the radio- 


30 


cabin. As I pressed down the door handle, I heard a harsh 
voice: 

“Who’s there?” 

“It’s me, Kelvin.” 

Snow was seated at a table between a pile of aluminum 
crates and the transmitter, eating meat concentrate 
straight out of a tin. Did he then never leave the place? 
Dazedly, I watched him chewing until I realized that I, too, 
was famished. I went to a cupboard, selected the least 
dusty plate I could find, and sat down opposite Snow. We 
ate in silence. 

Snow got up, uncorked a vacuum flask and filled two 
tumblers with clear, hot soup. Then he put the flask down 
on the floor; there was no room on the table. 

“Have you seen Sartorius?” he asked. 

“No. Where is he?” 

“Upstairs.” 

Upstairs: that meant the laboratory. We finished our 
meal without exchanging another word, Snow dutifully 
scraping the bottom of his tin. The outer shutter was in 
place over the window and reflections from the four ceil- 
ing lights gleamed on the laminated surface of the trans- 
mitter. Snow had put on a loose black sweater, frayed at 
the wrists. The taut skin over his cheekbones was marbled 
with tiny blood-vessels. 

“What’s the matter?” he asked. 

“Nothing, why?” 

“You’re pouring with sweat.” 

I wiped my forehead. It was true, I was dripping wet; it 
must have been reaction, after my unexpected encounter. 
Snow gave me a questioning glance. Should I tell him? If 
only he had taken me into his confidence. . . What incom- 
prehensible game was being played here, and who was 
whose enemy? 

“It’s hot. I should have expected your air-conditioning 
to work better than this!” 

“It adjusts itself automatically every hour.” He looked 
at me closely. “Are you sure it’s only the heat?” 

I did not answer. He tossed the utensils and the empty 


31 


tins into the sink, returned to his armchair and went on 
with his interrogation. 

“What are your plans?” 

“That depends on you,” I answered coolly. “I suppose 
you have a research programme? A new stimulus, X-rays, 
that sort of thing. . 

He frowned. 

“X-rays? Who’s been talking to you about that?” 

“I don’t remember. Someone dropped a hint— on the 
Prometheus perhaps. Why, have you begun?” 

“I don’t know the details, it was an idea of Gibarian’s. 
He and Sartorius set it up together. I wonder how you 
could have heard of it.” 

I shrugged my shoulders. 

“Funny that you shouldn’t know the details. You ought 
to, since you’re the one who. . 

I left the sentence unfinished; Snow said nothing. 

The whining of the air-conditioners had stopped. The 
temperature stayed at a bearable level, but a high-pitched 
drone persisted, like the buzzing of a dying insect. 

Snow got up from his chair and leaned over the console 
of the transmitter. He began to press knobs at random, 
and to no effect, since he had left the activating switch off. 
He went on fidgeting with them for a moment, then he 
remarked: 

“There are certain formalities to be dealt with concern- 
ing. . 

“Yes?” I prompted, to his back. 

He turned round and gave me a hostile look. Involun- 
tarily, I had annoyed him; but ignorant of the role he was 
playing, I could only wait and see. His Adam’s apple rose 
and fell inside the collar of his sweater: 

“You’ve been into Gibarian’s room,” he blurted out 
accusingly. 

I looked at him calmly. 

“You have been in there, haven’t you?” 

“If you say so. . 

“Was there anyone there?” 

So he had seen her, or, at least, knew of her existence! 

“No, no one. Who could there have been?” 


32 


“Why didn’t you let me in, then?” 

“Because I was afraid. I thought of your warnings and 
when the handle moved, I automatically hung on to it. 
Why didn’t you say it was you? I would have let you in.” 

“I thought it was Sartorius,” he answered, in a faltering 
voice. 

“And suppose it had been?” 

Once again, he parried my question with one of his 
own. 

“What do you think happened in there?” 

I hesitated. 

“You’re the one who should know. Where is he?” 

“Gibarian? In the cold store. We took him there 
straight away this morning, after we’d found him in the 
locker.” 

“The locker? Was he dead?” 

“His heart was still beating, but he had stopped breath- 
ing.” 

“Did you try resuscitation?” 

“No.” 

“Why not?” 

“I didn’t have the chance,” he mumbled. “By the time 
I’d moved him, he was dead.” 

Snow picked up a sheet of paper from the fitted desk in 
the corner and held it out to me. 

“I have drafted a post-mortem report. I’m not sorry 
you’ve seen the room, as a matter of fact. Cause of death 
— pernostal injection, lethal dose. It’s all here. . .” 

I ran my eyes over the paper, and murmured: 

“Suicide? For what reason?” 

“Nervous troubles, depression, call it what you like. 
You know more about that sort of thing than I do.” 

I was still seated; Snow was standing over me. 

Looking him in the eye, I said: 

“I only know what I’ve seen for myself.” 

“What are you trying to say?” he asked calmly. 

“He injected himself with pernostal and hid in the 
locker, right? In that case, it’s not a question of nervous 
troubles or a fit of depression, but of a very serious para- 
noid condition.” Speaking more and more deliberately 


33 


and continuing to look him in the eyes, I added: “What is 
certain is that he thought he saw something.” 

Snow began fiddling with the transmitter again. 

After a moment’s silence, I went on. 

“Your signature’s here. What about Sartorius’s?” 

“As I told you, he’s in the laboratory. He never shows 
his face. I suppose he’s. . 

“What?” 

“Locked himself in.” 

“Locked himself in? I see. . . you mean he’s barricaded 
himself in?” 

“Possibly.” 

“Snow, there’s someone on the Station. Someone apart 
from us.” 

He had stopped playing with the knobs and was leaning 
sideways, staring at me. 

“You’ve seen it!” 

“You warned me. Against what? Against whom? An 
hallucination?” 

“What did you see?” 

“Shall we say. . . a human being?” 

He remained silent. Turning his back as though to hide 
his face from me, he tapped the metal plating with his 
finger-tips. I looked at his hands; there was no longer any 
trace of blood between the fingers. I had a brief moment 
of dizziness. 

In scarcely more than a whisper, as though I were im- 
parting a secret and afraid of being overheard, I said: 

“It’s not a mirage, is it? It’s a real person, someone you 
can touch, someone you can. . . draw blood from. And 
what’s more, someone you’ve seen only today.” 

“How do you know?” 

He had not moved; his face was still obstinately turned 
to the wall and I was addressing his back. 

“It was before I arrived, just before I arrived, wasn’t 
it?” 

His whole body contracted, and I could see his panic- 
stricken expression. 

“What about you?” he said in a strangled voice, “who 
are you?” 


34 


I thought he was about to attack me. It was not at all the 
reaction I had expected. The situation was becoming gro- 
tesque. Obviously, he did not believe that I was who I 
claimed to be. But what could this mean? He was becom- 
ing more and more terrified of me. Was he delirious? 
Could he have been affected by unfiltered gases from the 
planet’s atmosphere? Anything seemed possible. And 
then again, I too had seen this . . . creature, so what about 
me? 

“Who is she?” I asked. 

These words reassured him. For a moment, he looked 
at me searchingly, as though he was still doubtful of me; 
then he collapsed into his chair and put his head in his 
hands. Even before he opened his mouth, I knew that he 
had still not made up his mind to give me a direct answer. 

“I’m worn out,” he said weakly. 

“Who is she?” I insisted. 

“If you don’t know. . . ” 

“Go on, know what?” 

“Nothing.” 

“Listen, Snow! We are isolated, completely cut off. 
Let’s put our cards on the table. Things are confused 
enough as it is. You’ve got to tell me what you know!” 

“What about you?” he retorted, suspiciously. 

“All right, I’ll tell you and then you tell me. Don’t worry, 
I shan’t think you’re mad.” 

“Mad! Good God!” He tried to smile. “But you haven’t 
understood a thing, not a single thing. He never for one 
moment thought that he was mad. If he had he would 
never have done it. He would still be alive.” 

“In other words, your report, this business of nervous 
troubles, is a fabrication.” 

“Of course.” 

“Why not write the truth?” 

“Why?” he repeated. 

A long silence followed. It was true that I was still com- 
pletely in the dark. I had been under the impression that 
I had overcome his doubts and that we were going to pool 
our resources to solve the enigma. Why, then, was he 
refusing to talk? 


35 


“Where are the robots?” 

“In the store-rooms. We’ve locked them all away; only 
the reception robots are operational.” 

“Why?” 

Once more, he refused to answer. 

“You don’t want to talk about it?” 

“I can’t.” 

He seemed constantly on the point of unburdening 
himself, only to pull himself up at the last moment. Per- 
haps I would do better to tackle Sartorius. Then I remem- 
bered the letter and, as I thought of it, realized how 
important it was. 

“Do you intend continuing with the experiments?” 

He gave a contemptuous shrug: 

“What good would that do?” 

“Oh — in that case, what do you suggest we do?” 

He was silent. In the distance, there was a faint noise of 
bare feet padding over the floor. The muffled echo of 
these shuffling steps reverberated eerily among the nick- 
el-plated and laminated equipment and the tall shafts, 
furrowed with glass tubes, which encased the complicated 
electronic installations. 

Unable to control myself any longer, I stood up. As I 
listened to the approaching footsteps, I watched Snow. 
Behind the drooping lids, his eyes showed no fear. Was 
he not afraid of her, then? 

“Where does she come from?” I asked. 

“I don’t know.” 

The sound of the footsteps faded, then died away. 

“Don’t you believe me?” he said. “I swear to you that 
I don’t know.” 

In the silence that followed, I opened a locker, pushed 
the clumsy atmosphere-suits aside and found, as I ex- 
pected, hanging at the back, the gas pistols used for ma- 
noeuvering in space. I took one out, checked the charge, 
and slung the harness over my shoulder. It was not, 
strictly speaking, a weapon, but it was better than nothing. 

As I was adjusting a strap. Snow showed his yellow 
teeth in a mocking grin. 

“Good hunting!” he said. 


36 


I turned towards the door. 

“Thanks.” 

He dragged himself out of his chair. 

“Kelvin!” 

I looked at him. He was no longer smiling. I have never 
seen such an expression of weariness on anyone’s face. 
He mumbled: 

“Kelvin, it isn’t that. . . Really, I. . . I can’t. . . ” 

I waited; his lips moved, but uttered no sound. I turned 
on my heel and went out. 


37 


Sartorius 


I followed a long, empty corridor, then forked right. I had 
never lived on the Station, but during my training on 
Earth I had spent six weeks in an exact replica of it; when 
I reached a short aluminum stairway, 1 knew where it led. 

The library was in darkness, and I had to fumble for the 
light switch. I first consulted the index, then dialled the 
coordinates for the first volume of the Solarist Annual and 
its Supplement. A red light came on. I turned to the regis- 
ter: the two books were marked out to Gibarian, together 
with The Little Apocrypha. I switched the lights off and re- 
turned to the lower deck. 

In spite of having heard the footsteps receding, I was 
afraid to re-enter Gibarian’s room. She might return. I 
hesitated for some time outside the door; finally, pressing 
down the handle, I forced myself to go in. 

There was no one in the room. I began rummaging 
through the books scattered beneath the window, inter- 
rupting my search only to close the locker door: I could 
not bear the sight of the empty space among the work- 
suits. 

The supplement was not in the first pile, so, one by one, 
I started methodically picking up the rest of the books 
around the room. When I reached the final pile, between 


38 


the bed and the wardrobe, I found the volume I was look- 
ing for. 

I was hoping to find some sort of clue and, sure enough, 
a book-marker had been slipped between the pages of the 
index. A name, unfamiliar to me, had been underlined in 
red: Andre Berton. The corresponding page numbers 
indicated two different chapters; glancing at the first, I 
learnt that Berton was a reserve pilot on Shannahan’s 
ship. The second reference appeared about a hundred 
pages further on. 

At first, it seemed, Shannahan’s expedition had pro- 
ceeded with extreme caution. When, however, after six- 
teen days, the plasmatic ocean had not only shown no 
signs of aggression, but appeared to shun any direct con- 
tact with men and machines, recoiling whenever anything 
approached its surface, Shannahan and his deputy, Timo- 
lis, discontinued some of the precautions which were hin- 
dering the progress of their work. The force fences which 
had been used to demarcate and protect the working 
areas were taken back to base, and the expedition split up 
into groups of two or three men, some groups making 
reconnaissance flights over a radius of some several hun- 
dred miles. 

Apart from some unexpected damage to the oxygen- 
supply systems — the atmosphere had an unusually corro- 
sive effect on the valves, which had to be replaced almost 
daily — four days passed without mishap. On the morning 
of the fifth day — 21 days after the arrival of the expedition 
— two scientists, Carucci and Fechner (the first a radiobi- 
ologist, the second a physicist), left on a mission aboard 
a hovercraft. Six hours later, the explorers were overdue. 
Timolis, who was in charge of the base in Shannahan’s 
absence, raised the alarm and diverted every available 
man into search-parties. 

By a fatal combination of circumstances, long-range 
radio contact had been cut that morning an hour after the 
departure of the exploration groups — a large spot had 
appeared on the red sun, producing a heavy bombard- 
ment of charged particles in the upper atmosphere. Only 


39 


the ultra-shortwave transmitters continued to function, 
and contact was restricted to a radius of about twenty 
miles. As a crowning stroke of bad luck, a thick fog de- 
scended just before sunset and the search had to be called 
off. 

The rescue teams were returning to base when the 
hovercraft was spotted by a flitter, barely 24 miles from 
the command-ship. The engine was running and the ma- 
chine, at first sight undamaged, was hovering above the 
waves. Carucci alone could be seen, semi-conscious, in 
the glass-domed cockpit. 

The hovercraft was escorted back to base. After treat- 
ment, Carucci quickly regained consciousness, but could 
throw no light on Fechner’s disappearance. Just after they 
had decided to return to base a valve in his oxygen-gear 
had failed and a small amount of unfiltered gas had pene- 
trated his atmosphere-suit. In an attempt to repair the 
valve, Fechner had been forced to undo his safety belt and 
stand up. That was the last thing Carucci could remem- 
ber. 

According to the experts who reconstructed the se- 
quence of events, Fechner must have opened the cabin 
roof because it impeded his movements — a perfectly 
legitimate thing to do since the cabins of these vehicles 
were not air-tight, the glass dome merely providing some 
protection against infiltration and turbulence. While 
Fechner was occupied with his colleague, his own oxygen 
supply had probably been damaged and, no longer realiz- 
ing what he was doing, he had pulled himself up on to the 
superstructure, from which he had fallen into the ocean. 

Fechner thus became the ocean’s first victim. Although 
the atmosphere-suit was buoyant, they searched for his 
body without success. It was, of course, possible that it 
was still floating somewhere on the surface, but the expe- 
dition was not equipped for a thorough search of this 
immense, undulating desert, covered with patches of 
dense fog. 

By dusk, all but one of the search craft had returned to 
base; only a big supply helicopter piloted by Andre Berton 
was still missing. Just as they were about to raise the 


40 


alarm, the aircraft appeared. Berton was obviously suffer- 
ing from nervous shock; after struggling out of his suit, 
he ran round in circles like a madman. He had to be 
overpowered, but went on shouting and sobbing. It was 
rather surprising behavior to put it mildly, on the part of 
a man who had been flying for seventeen years and was 
well used to the hazards of cosmic navigation. The doc- 
tors assumed that he too was suffering from the effects of 
unfiltered gases. 

Having more or less recovered his senses, Berton nev- 
ertheless refused to leave the base, or even to go near the 
window overlooking the ocean. Two days later, he asked 
for permission to dictate a flight-report, stressing the im- 
portance of what he was about to reveal. This report was 
studied by the expeditionary council, who concluded that 
it was the morbid creation of a mind under the influence 
of poisonous gases from the atmosphere. As for the sup- 
posed revelations, they were evidently regarded as part of 
Berton’s clinical history rather than that of the expedition 
itself, and they were not described. 

So much for the supplement. It seemed to me that 
Berton’s report must at any rate provide a key to the 
mystery. What strange happening could have had such a 
shattering effect on a veteran space-pilot? I began to 
search through the books once more, but The Little Apocry- 
pha was not to be found. I was growing more and more 
exhausted and left the room, having decided to postpone 
the search until the following day. 

As I was passing the foot of the stairway, I noticed that 
the aluminum treads were streaked with light falling from 
above. Sartorius was still at work. I decided to go up and 
see him. 

It was hotter on the upper deck, but the paper strips still 
fluttered frenziedly at the air vents. The corridor was wide 
and low-ceilinged. The main laboratory was enclosed by 
a thick panel of opaque glass in a chrome embrasure. A 
dark curtain screened the door on the inside, and the light 
was coming from windows let in above the lintel. I pressed 
down the handle, but, as I expected, the door refused to 
budge. The only sound from the laboratory was an inter- 


41 


mittent whine like that of a defective gas jet. I knocked. No 
reply. I called: 

“Sartorius! Dr. Sartorius! I’m the new man, Kelvin. I 
must see you, it’s very important. Please let me in!” 

There was a rustling of papers. 

“It’s me, Kelvin. You must have heard of me. I arrived 
off the Prometheus a few hours ago.” 

I was shouting, my lips glued to the angle where the 
door joined the metal frame. 

“Dr. Sartorius, I’m alone. Please open the door!” 

Not a word. Then the same rustling as before, followed 
by the clink of metal instruments on a tray. Then. . . I 
could scarcely believe my ears. . . there came a succession 
of little short footsteps, like the rapid drumming of a pair 
of tiny feet, or remarkably agile fingers tapping out the 
rhythm of steps on the lid of an empty tin box. 

I yelled: 

“Dr. Sartorius, are you going to open this door, yes or 
no?” 

No answer. Nothing but the pattering, and, simultane- 
ously, the sound of a man walking on tiptoe. But, if the 
man was moving about, he could not at the same time be 
tapping out an imitation of a child’s footsteps. 

No longer able to control my growing fury, I burst out: 

“Dr. Sartorius, I have not made a sixteen-month jour- 
ney just to come here and play games! I’ll count up to ten. 
If you don’t let me in, I shall break down the door!” 

In fact, I was doubtful whether it would be easy to force 
this particular door, and the discharge of a gas pistol is 
not very powerful. Nevertheless, I was determined some- 
how or other to carry out my threat, even if it meant 
resorting to explosives, which I could probably find in the 
munition store. I could not draw back now; I could not go 
on playing an insane game with all the cards stacked 
against me. 

There was the sound of a struggle — or was it simply 
objects being thrust aside? The curtain was pulled back, 
and an elongated shadow was projected on to the glass. 

A hoarse, high-pitched voice spoke: 

“If I open the door, you must give me your word not 
to come in.” 


42 


“In that case, why open it?” 

“I’ll come out.” 

“Very well, I promise.” 

The silhouette vanished and the curtain was carefully 
replaced. 

Obscure noises came from inside the laboratory. I 
heard a scraping — a table being dragged across the floor? 
At last, the lock clicked back, and the glass panel opened 
just enough to allow Sartorius to slip through into the 
corridor. 

He stood with his back against the door, very tall and 
thin, all bones under his white sweater. He had a black 
scarf knotted around his neck, and over his arm he was 
carrying a laboratory smock, covered with chemical 
burns. His head, which was unusually narrow, was cocked 
to one side. I could not see his eyes: he wore curved dark 
glasses, which covered up half his face. His lower jaw was 
elongated; he had bluish lips and enormous, blue-tinged 
ears. He was unshaven. Red anti-radiation gloves hung by 
their laces from his wrists. 

For a moment we looked at one another with undis- 
guised aversion. His shaggy hair (he had obviously cut it 
himself) was the color of lead, his beard grizzled. Like 
Snow, his forehead was burnt, but the lower half only; 
above, it was pallid. He must have worn some kind of cap 
when exposed to the sun. 

“Well, I’m listening,” he said. 

I had the impression that he did not care what I had to 
say to him.' Standing there, tense, still pressed against the 
door panel, his attention was mainly directed to what was 
going on behind him. 

Disconcerted, I hardly knew how to begin. 

“My name is Kelvin,” I said, “You must have heard 
about me. I am, or rather I was, a colleague of Gibarian’s.” 

His thin face, entirely composed of vertical planes, ex- 
actly as I had always imagined Don Quixote’s, was quite 
expressionless. This blank mask did not help me to find 
the right words. 

“I heard that Gibarian was dead ...” I broke off. 

“Yes. Go on, I’m listening.” His voice betrayed his 
impatience. 


43 


“Did he commit suicide? Who found the body, you or 
Snow?” 

“Why ask me? Didn’t Dr. Snow tell you what hap- 
pened?” 

“I wanted to hear your own account.” 

“You’ve studied psychology, haven’t you, Dr. Kelvin?” 

“Yes. What of it?” 

“You think of yourself as a servant of science?” 

“Yes, of course. What has that to do with. . .” 

“You are not an officer of the law. At this hour of the 
day, you should be at work, but instead of doing the job 
you were sent here for, you not only threaten to force the 
door of my laboratory, you question me as though I were 
a criminal suspect.” 

His forehead was dripping with sweat. I controlled my- 
self with an effort. I was determined to get through to him. 
I gritted my teeth and said: 

“You are suspect, Dr. Sartorius. What is more, you’re 
well aware of it!” 

“Kelvin, unless you either retract or apologize, I shall 
lodge a complaint against you.” 

“Why should I apologize? You’re the one who bar- 
ricaded himself in this laboratory instead of coming out 
to meet me, instead of telling me the truth about what is 
going on here. Have you gone completely mad? What are 
you — a scientist, or a miserable coward?” 

I don’t know what other insults I hurled at him. He did 
not even flinch. Globules of sweat trickled down over the 
enlarged pores of his cheeks. Suddenly I realized that he 
had not heard a word I was saying. Both hands behind his 
back, he was holding the door in position with all his 
strength; it was rattling as though someone inside were 
firing bursts from a machine-gun at the panel. 

In a strange, high-pitched voice, he moaned: 

“Go away. For God’s sake, leave me. Go downstairs, I’ll 
join you later. I’ll do whatever you want, only please go 
away now.” 

His voice betrayed such exhaustion that instinctively I 
put out my arms to help him control the door. At this, he 
uttered a cry of horror, as though I had pointed a knife at 


44 


him. As I retreated, he was shouting in his falsetto voice: 
“Go away! Go away! I’m coming, I’m coming, I’m com- 
ing! No! No!” He opened the door and shot inside. I 
thought I saw a shining yellow disc flash across his chest. 

Now a muffled clamor rose from the laboratory; a huge 
shadow appeared, as the curtain was brushed momen- 
tarily aside; then it fell back into place and I could see 
nothing more. What was happening inside that room? I 
heard running footsteps, as though a mad chase were in 
progress, followed by a terrifying crash of broken glass 
and the sound of a child’s laugh. 

My legs were trembling, and I stared at the door, ap- 
palled. The din had subsided, giving way to an uneasy 
silence. I sat down on a window ledge, too stunned to 
move; my head was splitting. 

From where I was, I could see only a part of the corridor 
encircling the laboratory. I was at the summit of the Sta- 
tion, beneath the actual shell of the superstructure; the 
walls were concave and sloping, with oblong windows a 
few yards apart. The blue day was ending, and, as the 
shutters grated upwards, a blinding light shone through 
the thick glass. Every metal fitting, every latch and joint, 
blazed, and the great glass panel of the laboratory door 
glittered with pale coruscations. My hands looked grey in 
the spectral light. I noticed that I was holding the gas 
pistol; I had not realized that I had taken it out of its 
holster, and replaced it. What use could I have made of it 
— or even of a gamma pistol, had I had one? I could hardly 
have taken the laboratory by force. 

I got up. The disc of the sun, reminiscent of a hydrogen 
explosion, was sinking into the ocean, and as I descended 
the stairway I was pierced by a jet of horizontal rays which 
was almost tangible. Halfway downstairs I paused to 
think, then went back up the steps and followed the corri- 
dor round the laboratory. Soon, I came across a second 
glass door, exactly like the first; I made no attempt to 
open it, knowing that it would be locked. 

I was looking for an opening or vent of some sort. The 
idea of spying on Sartorius had come to me quite natu- 
rally, without the least sense of shame. I was determined 


IS 


to have done with conjecture and discover the truth, even 
if, as I imagined it would, the truth proved incomprehen- 
sible. It struck me that the laboratory must be lit from 
above by windows let into the dome. It should be possible, 
therefore, to spy on Sartorius from the outside. But first 
I should have to equip myself with an atmosphere-suit and 
oxygen gear. 

When I reached the deck below, I found the door of the 
radio-cabin ajar. Snow, sunk in his armchair, was asleep. 
At the sound of my footsteps, he opened his eyes with a 
start. 

“Hello, Kelvin!” he croaked. “Well, did you discover 
anything?” 

“Yes. . . he’s not alone.” 

Snow grinned sourly. 

“Oh, really? Well, that’s something. Has he got 
visitors?” 

“I can’t understand why you won’t tell me what’s going 
on,” I retorted impulsively. “ Since I have to remain here. 
I’m bound to find out the truth sooner or later. Why the 
mystery?” 

“When you’ve received some visitors yourself, you’ll 
understand.” 

I had the impression that my presence annoyed him 
and he had no desire to prolong the conversation. 

I turned to go. 

“Where are you off to?” 

I did not answer. 

The hangar-deck was just as I had left it. My burnt-out 
capsule still stood there, gaping open, on its platform. On 
my way to select an atmosphere-suit, I suddenly realized 
that the skylights through which I hoped to observe Sar- 
torius would probably be made of slabs of opaque glass, 
and I lost interest in my venture on to the outer hull. 

Instead, I descended the spiral stairway which led to the 
lower-deck store rooms. The cramped passage at the bot- 
tom contained the usual litter of crates and cylinders. The 
walls were sheeted in bare metal which had a bluish glint. 
A little further on, the frosted pipes of the refrigeration 
plant appeared beneath a vault and I followed them to the 


46 


far end of the corridor where they vanished into a cooling- 
jacket with a wide, plastic collar. The door to the cold 
store was two inches thick and lagged with an insul- 
ating compound. When I opened it, the icy cold 
gripped me. I stood, shivering, on the threshold of a cave 
carved out of an iceberg; the huge coils, like sculptured 
reliefs, were hung with stalactites. Here, too, buried 
beneath a covering of snow, there were crates and cylin- 
ders, and shelves laden with boxes and transparent bags 
containing a yellow, oily substance. The vault sloped 
downwards to where a curtain of ice hid the back of the 
cave. I broke through it. An elongated figure, covered 
with a sheet of canvas, lay stretched out on an aluminum 
rack. 

I lifted a corner of the canvas and recognised the stiff 
features of Gibarian. His glossy black hair clung tightly to 
his skull. The sinews of his throat stood out like bones. 
His glazed eyes stared up at the vault, a tear of opaque ice 
hanging from the corner of each lid. The cold was so 
intense that I had to clench my teeth to prevent them from 
chattering. I touched Gibarian’s cheek; it was like touch- 
ing a block of petrified wood, bristling with black prickly 
hairs. The curve of the lips seemed to express an infinite, 
disdainful patience. 

As I let the canvas fall, I noticed, peeping out from 
beneath the folds at the foot, five round, shiny objects, like 
black pearls, ranged in order of size. I stiffened with hor- 
ror. 

What I had seen were the round pads of five bare toes. 
Under the shroud, flattened against Gibarian’s body, lay 
the Negress. Slowly, I pulled back the canvas. Her head, 
covered in frizzy hair twisted up into little tufts, was rest- 
ing in the hollow of one massive arm. Her back glistened, 
the skin stretched taut over the spinal column. The huge 
body gave no sign of life. I looked again at the soles of her 
naked feet; they had not been flattened or deformed in any 
way by the weight which they had had to carry. Walking 
had not calloused the skin, which was as unblemished as 
that of her shoulders. 

With a far greater effort than it had taken to touch 


47 


Gibarian’s corpse, I forced myself to touch one of the bare 
feet. Then I made a second bewildering discovery: this 
body, abandoned in a deep freeze, this apparent corpse, 
lived and moved. The woman had withdrawn her foot, like 
a sleeping dog when you try to take its paw. 

“She’ll freeze,” I thought confusedly, but her flesh had 
been warm to the touch, and I even imagined I had felt the 
regular beating of her pulse. I backed out and fled. 

As I emerged from the white cave, the heat seemed 
suffocating. I climbed the spiral stairway back to the han- 
gar-deck. 

I sat on the hoops of a rolled-up parachute and put my 
head in my hands. I was stunned. My thoughts ran wild. 
What was happening to me? If my reason was giving way, 
the sooner I lost consciousness the better. The idea of 
sudden extinction aroused an inexpressible, unrealistic 
hope. 

Useless to go and find Snow or Sartorius: no one could 
fully understand what I had just experienced, what I had 
seen, what I had touched with my own hands. There was 
only one possible explanation, one possible conclusion: 
madness. Yes, that was it, I had gone mad as soon as I 
arrived here. Emanations from the ocean had attacked my 
brain, and hallucination had followed hallucination. 
Rather than exhaust myself trying to solve these illusory 
riddles, I would do better to ask for medical assistance, to 
radio the Prometheus or some other vessel, to send out an 
SOS. 

Then a curious change came over me: at the thought 
that I had gone mad, I calmed down. 

And yet. . . I had heard Snow’s words quite clearly. If, 
that is, Snow existed and I had ever spoken to him. The 
hallucinations might have begun much earlier. Perhaps I 
was still on board the Prometheus; perhaps I had been 
stricken with a sudden mental illness and was now con- 
fronting the creations of my own inflamed brain. Assum- 
ing that I was ill, there was reason to believe that I would 
get better, which gave me some hope of deliverance — a 
hope irreconcilable with a belief in the reality of the tan- 
gled nightmares through which I had just lived. 


48 


If only I could think up some experiment in logic — a key 
experiment — which would reveal whether I had really 
gone mad and was a helpless prey to the figments of my 
imagination, or whether, in spite of their ludicrous im- 
probability, I had been experiencing real events. 

As I turned all this over in my mind, I was looking at 
the monorail which led to the launching pad. It was a steel 
girder, painted pale green, a yard above the ground. Here 
and there, the paint was chipped, worn by the friction of 
the rocket trolleys. I touched the steel, feeling it grow 
warm beneath my fingers, and rapped the metal plating 
with my knuckles. Could madness attain such a degree of 
reality? Yes, I answered myself. After all, it was my own 
subject, I knew what I was talking about. 

But was it possible to work out a controlled experi- 
ment? At first I told myself that it was not, since my sick 
brain (if it really was sick) would create the illusions I 
demanded of it. Even while dreaming, when we are in 
perfectly good health, we talk to strangers, put questions 
to them and hear their replies. Moreover, although our 
interlocutors are in fact the creations of our own psychic 
activity, evolved by a pseudo-independent process, until 
they have spoken to us we do not know what words will 
emerge from their lips. And yet these words have been 
formulated by a separate part of our own minds; we 
should therefore be aware of them at the very moment 
that we think them up in order to put them into the 
mouths of imaginary beings. Consequently, whatever 
form my proposed test were to take, and whatever method 
I used to put it into execution, there was always the possi- 
bility that I was behaving exactly as in a dream. Neither 
Snow nor Sartorius having any real existence, it would be 
pointless to put questions to them. 

I thought of taking some powerful drug, peyotl for ex- 
ample, or another preparation inducing vivid hallucina- 
tions. If visions ensued, this would prove that I had really 
experienced these recent events and that they were part 
and parcel of the surrounding material reality. But then, 
no, I thought, this would not constitute the proof I 
needed, since I knew the effects of the drug (which I 


49 


should have chosen for myselQ and my imagination could 
suggest to me the double illusion of having taken the drug 
and of experiencing its effects. 

I was going around in circles; there seemed to be no 
escape. It was not possible to think except with one’s 
brain, no one could stand outside himself in order to 
check the functioning of his inner processes. Suddenly an 
idea struck me, as simple as it was effective. 

I leapt to my feet and ran to the radio cabin. The room 
was deserted. I glanced at the electric clock on the wall. 
Nearly four o’clock, the fourth hour of the Station’s artifi- 
cial night-time. Outside, the red sun was shining. I quickly 
plugged in the long-range transmitter, and while the 
valves warmed up, I went over in my mind the principal 
stages of the experiment. 

I could not remember the call-sign for the automatic 
station on the satellite, but I found it on a card hanging 
above the main instrument panel, sent it out in Morse, 
and received the answering signal eight seconds later. 
The satellite, or rather its electronic brain, identified itself 
by a rhythmic pulse. 

I instructed the satellite to give me the figures for the 
galactic meridians it was traversing at 22-second intervals 
while orbiting Solaris, and I specified an answer to five 
decimal points. 

Then I sat and waited for the reply. Ten minutes later, 
it arrived. I tore off the strip of freshly printed paper and 
hid it in a drawer, taking care not to look at it. I went to 
the bookcase and took out the big galactic charts, the 
logarithm tables, a calendar giving the daily path of the 
satellite, and various other textbooks. Then I sat down to 
work out for myself the answer to the question I had 
posed. For an hour or more, I integrated the equations. 
It was a long time since I had tackled such elaborate calcu- 
lations. My last major effort in this direction must have 
been my practical astronomy exam. 

I worked at the problem with the help of the Station’s 
giant computer. My reasoning went as follows: by making 
my calculations from the galactic charts, I would obtain an 
approximate cross-check with the results provided by the 


50 


satellite. Approximate because the path of the satellite 
was subject to very complex variations due to the effects 
of the gravitational forces of Solaris and its two suns, as 
well as to the local variations in gravity caused by the 
ocean. When I had the two series of figures, one furnished 
by the satellite and the other calculated theoretically on 
the basis of the galactic charts, I would make the necessary 
adjustments and the two groups would then coincide up 
to the fourth decimal point, discrepancies due to the un- 
foreseeable influence of the ocean arising only at the fifth. 

If the figures obtained from the satellite were simply the 
product of my deranged mind, they could not possibly 
coincide with the second series. My brain might be un- 
hinged, but it could not conceivably compete with the 
Station’s giant computer and secretly perform calcula- 
tions requiring several months’ work. Therefore if the 
figures corresponded, it would follow that the Station’s 
computer really existed, that I had really used it, and that 
I was not delirious. 

My hands trembled as I took the telegraphic tape out of 
the drawer and laid it alongside the wide band of paper 
from the computer. As I had predicted, the two series of 
numbers corresponded up to the fourth decimal point. 

I put all the papers away in the drawer. So the computer 
existed independently of me; that meant that the Station 
and its inhabitants really existed too. 

As I was closing the drawer, I noticed that it was stuffed 
with sheets of paper covered with hastily scribbled sums. 
A single glance told me that someone had already at- 
tempted an experiment similar to mine and had asked the 
satellite, not for information about the galactic meridians, 
but for the measurements of Solaris’s albedo at intervals 
of forty seconds. 

I was not mad. The last ray of hope was extinguished. 
I unplugged the transmitter, drank the remains of the 
soup in the vacuum flask, and went to bed. 


51 


R h ey a 


Desperation and a sort of dumb rage had sustained me 
while working with the computer. Now, overcome with 
exhaustion, I could not even remember how to let down 
a mechanical bed. Forgetting to push back the clamps, I 
hung on to the handle with all my weight and the mattress 
tumbled down on top of me. 

I tore off my clothes and flung them away from me, then 
collapsed on to the pillow, without even taking the trouble 
to inflate it properly. I fell asleep with the lights on. 

I reopened my eyes with the impression of having 
dozed off for only a few minutes. The room was bathed in 
a dim red light. It was cooler, and I felt refreshed. 

I lay there, the bedclothes pushed back, completely 
naked. The curtains were half drawn, and there, opposite 
me, beside the window-pane lit by the red sun, someone 
was sitting. It was Rheya. She was wearing a white beach 
dress, the material stretched tightly over her breasts. She 
sat with her legs crossed; her feet were bare. Motionless, 
leaning on her sun-tanned arms, she gazed at me from 
beneath her black lashes: Rheya, with her dark hair 
brushed back. For a long time, I lay there peacefully gaz- 
ing back at her. My first thought was reassuring: I was 
dreaming and I was aware that I was dreaming. Neverthe- 


52 


less, I would have preferred her not to be there. I closed 
my eyes and tried to shake off the dream. When I opened 
them again, Rheya was still sitting opposite me. Her lips 
were pouting slightly — a habit of hers — as though she 
were about to whistle; but her expression was serious. I 
thought of my recent speculations on the subject of 
dreams. 

She had not changed since the day I had seen her for 
the last time; she was then a girl of nineteen. Today, she 
would be twenty-nine. But, evidently, the dead do not 
change; they remain eternally young. She went on gazing 
at me, an expression of surprise on her face. I thought of 
throwing something at her, but, even in a dream, I could 
not bring myself to harm a dead person. 

I murmured: “Poor little thing, have you come to visit 
me?” 

The sound of my voice frightened me; the room, Rheya, 
everything seemed extraordinarily real. A three-dimen- 
sional dream, colored in half-tones. ... I saw several 
objects on the floor which I had not noticed when I went 
to bed. When I wake up, I told myself, I shall check 
whether these things are still there or whether, like Rheya, 
I only saw them in a dream. 

“Do you mean to stay for long?” I asked. I realized that 
I was speaking very softly, like someone afraid of being 
overheard. Why worry about eavesdroppers in a dream? 

The sun was rising over the horizon. A good sign. I had 
gone to bed during a red day, which should have been 
succeeded by a blue day, followed by another red day. I 
had not slept for fifteen hours at a stretch. So it was a 
dream! 

Reassured, I looked closely at Rheya. She was silhouet- 
ted against the sun. The scarlet rays cast a glow over the 
smooth skin of her left cheek and the shadows of her 
eyelashes fell across her face. How pretty she was! Even 
in my sleep my memory of her was uncannily precise. I 
watched the movements of the sun, waiting to see the 
dimple appear in that unusual place slightly below the 
corner of the lips. All the same, I would have preferred to 


53 


wake up. It was time I did some work. I closed my eyelids 
tightly. 

I heard a metallic noise, and opened my eyes again. 
Rheya was sitting beside me on the bed, still looking at me 
gravely. I smiled at her. She smiled back at me and leant 
forward. We kissed. First a timid, childish kiss, then more 
prolonged ones. I held her for a long time. Was it possible 
to feel so much in a dream, I wondered. I was not betray- 
ing her memory, for it was of her that I was dreaming, 
only her. It had never happened to me before. . . . 

Was it then that I began to have doubts? I went on 
telling myself that it was a dream, but my heart tightened. 

I tensed my muscles, ready to leap out of bed. I was 
half-expecting to fail, for often, in dreams, your sluggish 
body refuses to respond. I hoped that the effort would 
drag me out of sleep. But I did not wake; I sat on the edge 
of the bed, my legs dangling. There was nothing for it, I 
should have to endure this dream right to the bitter end. 
My feeling of well-being had vanished. I was afraid. 

“What ...” I asked. I cleared my throat. “What do you 
want?” 

I felt around the floor with my bare feet, searching for 
a pair of slippers. I stubbed my toe against a sharp edge, 
and stifled a cry of pain. That’ll wake me up, I thought with 
satisfaction, at the same time remembering that I had no 
slippers. 

But still it went on. Rheya had drawn back and was 
leaning against the end of the bed. Her dress rose and fell 
lightly with her breathing. She watched me with quiet 
interest. 

Quick, I thought, a shower! But then I realized that in 
a dream a shower would not interrupt my sleep. 

“Where have you come from?” 

She seized my hand and, with a gesture I knew well, 
threw it up and caught it again, then played with my 
fingers. 

“I don’t know,” she replied. “Are you angry?” 

It was her voice, that familiar, low-pitched, slightly far- 
away voice, and that air of not caring much about what she 


54 


was saying, of already being preoccupied with something 
else. People used to think her off-hand, even rude, be- 
cause the expression on her face rarely changed from one 
of vague astonishment. 

“Did . . . did anyone see you?” 

“I don’t know. I got here without any trouble. Why, 
Kris, is it important?" 

She was still playing with my fingers, but her face now 
wore a slight frown. 

“Rheya.” 

“What, my darling?” 

“How did you know where I was?” 

She pondered. A broad smile revealed her teeth. 

“I haven’t the faintest idea. Isn’t it funny? When I came 
in you were asleep. I didn’t wake you up because you get 
cross so easily. You have a very bad temper.” 

She squeezed my hand. 

“Did you go down below?” 

“Yes. It was all frozen. I ran away.” 

She let go of my hand and lay back. With her hair falling 
to one side, she looked at me with the half-smile that had 
irritated me before it had captivated me. 

“But, Rheya ...” I stammered. 

I leaned over her and turned back the short sleeve of 
her dress. There, just above her vaccination scar, was a 
red dot, the mark of a hypodermic needle. I was not really 
surprised, but my heart gave a lurch. 

I touched the red spot with my finger. For years now I 
had dreamt of it, over and over again, always waking with 
a shudder to find myself in the same position, doubled up 
between the crumpled sheets— just as I had found her, 
already growing cold. It was as though, in my sleep, I tried 
to relive what she had gone through; as though I hoped 
to turn back the clock and ask her forgiveness, or keep her 
company during those final minutes when she was feeling 
the effects of the injection and was overcome by terror. 
She, who dreaded the least scratch, who hated pain or the 
sight of blood, had deliberately done this horrible thing, 
leaving nothing but a few scribbled words addressed to 


55 


me. I had kept her note in my wallet. By now it was soiled 
and creased, but I had never had the heart to throw it 
away. 

Time and time again I had imagined her tracing those 
words and making her final preparations. I persuaded 
myself that she had only been play-acting, that she had 
wanted to frighten me and had taken an overdose by mis- 
take. Everyone told me that it must have happened like 
that, or else it had been a spontaneous decision, the result 
of a sudden depression. But people knew nothing of what 
I had said to her five days earlier; they did not know that, 
in order to twist the knife more cruelly, I had taken away 
my belongings and that she, as I was closing my suitcases, 
had said, very calmly: “I suppose you know what this 
means? And I had pretended not to understand, even 
though I knew quite well what she meant; I thought her 
too much of a coward, and had even told her as much. . 
. . And now she was lying across the bed, looking at me 
attentively, as though she did not know that it was I who 
had killed her. 

“Well?” she asked. Her eyes reflected the red sun. The 
entire room was red. Rheya looked at her arm with inter- 
est, because I had been examining it for so long, and when 
I drew back she laid her smooth, cool cheek in the palm 
of my hand. 

“Rheya,” I stammered, “it’s not possible. . .” 

“Hush!” 

I could sense the movement of her eyes beneath their 
closed lids. 

“Where are we, Rheya?” 

“At home.” 

“Where’s that?” 

One eye opened and shut again instantly. The long 
lashes tickled my palm. 

“Kris.” 

“What?” 

“I’m happy.” 

Raising my head, I could see part of the bed in the 
washbasin mirror: a cascade of soft hair— Rheya’s hair— 
and my bare knees. I pulled towards me with my foot one 


56 


of the misshapen objects I had found in the box and 
picked it up with my free hand. It was a spindle, one end 
of which had melted to a needle-point. I held the point to 
my skin and dug it in, just beside a small pink scar. The 
pain shot through my whole body. I watched the blood run 
down the inside of my thigh and drip noiselessly on to the 
floor. 

What was the use? Terrifying thoughts assailed me, 
thoughts which were taking a definite shape. I no longer 
told myself: “It’s a dream.” I had ceased to believe that. 
Now I was thinking: “I must be ready to defend myself.” 

I examined her shoulders, her hip under the close- 
fitting white dress, and her dangling naked feet. Leaning 
forward, I took hold of one of her ankles and ran my 
fingers over the sole of her foot. 

The skin was soft, like that of a newborn child. 

I knew then that it was not Rheya, and I was almost 
certain that she herself did not know it. 

The bare foot wriggled and Rheya’s lips parted in silent 
laughter. 

“Stop it,” she murmured. 

Cautiously I withdrew my hand from under the cheek 
and stood up. Then I dressed quickly. She sat up and 
watched me. 

“Where are your things?” I asked her. Immediately, I 
regretted my question. 

“My things?” 

“Don’t you have anything except that dress?” 

From now on, I would pursue the game with my eyes 
open. I tried to appear unconcerned, indifferent, as 
though we had parted only yesterday, as though we had 
never parted. 

She stood up. With a familiar gesture, she tugged at her 
skirt to smooth out the creases. My words had worried 
her, but she said nothing. For the first time, she examined 
the room with an enquiring, scrutinizing gaze. Then, puz- 
zled, she replied: 

“I don’t know.” She opened the locker door. “In here, 
perhaps?” 

“No, there’s nothing but work-suits in there.” 


57 


I found an electric point by the basin and began to 
shave, careful not to take my eyes off her. 

She went to and fro, rummaging everywhere. Eventu- 
ally, she came up to me and said: 

“Kris, I have the feeling that something’s happen- 

She broke off. I unplugged the razor, and waited. 

“I have the feeling that I’ve forgotten something,” she 
went on, “that I’ve forgotten a lot of things. I can only 
remember you. I ... I can’t remember anything else.” 

I listened to her, forcing myself to look unconcerned. 

“Have I . . . Have I been ill?” she asked. 

“Yes ... in a way. Yes, you’ve been slightly ill.” 

“There you are then. That explains my lapses of mem- 
ory.” 

She had brightened up again. Never shall I be able to 
describe how I felt then. As I watched her moving about 
the room, now smiling, now serious, talkative one mo- 
ment, silent the next, sitting down and then getting up 
again, my terror was gradually overcome by the convic- 
tion that it was the real Rheya there in the room with me, 
even though my reason told me that she seemed somehow 
stylized, reduced to certain characteristic expressions, 
gestures and movements. 

Suddenly, she clung to me. 

“What’s happening to us, Kris?” She pressed her fists 
against my chest. “Is everything all right? Is there some- 
thing wrong?” 

“Things couldn’t be better.” 

She smiled wanly. 

“When you answer me like that, it means things could 
hardly be worse.” 

“What nonsense!” I said hurriedly. “Rheya, my darling, 
I must leave you. Wait here for me.” And, because I was 
becoming extremely hungry, I added: “Would you like 
something to eat?” 

“To eat?” She shook her head. “No. Will I have to wait 
long for you?” 

“Only an hour.” 

“I’m coming with you.” 

“You can’t come with me. I’ve got work to do.” 


58 


“I’m coming with you.” 

She had changed. This was not Rheya at all; the real 
Rheya never imposed herself, would never have forced 
her presence on me. 

“It’s impossible, my sweet.” 

She looked me up and down. Then suddenly she seized 
my hand. And my hand lingered, moved up her warm, 
rounded arm. In spite of myself I was caressing her. My 
body recognized her body; my body desired her, my body 
was attracted towards hers beyond reason, beyond 
thought, beyond fear. 

Desperately trying to remain calm, I repeated: 

“Rheya, it’s out of the question. You must stay here.” 

A single word echoed round the room: 

“No.” 

“Why?” 

“I ... I don’t know.” She looked around her, then, once 
more, raised her eyes to mine. “I can’t,” she whispered. 

“But why?” 

“I don’t know. I can’t. It’s as though ... as though. . .” 
She searched for the answer which, as she uttered it, 
seemed to come to her like a revelation. “It’s as though 
I mustn’t let you out of my sight.” 

The resolute tone of her voice scarcely suggested an 
avowal of affection; it implied something quite different. 
With this realization, the manner in which I was embrac- 
ing Rheya underwent an abrupt, though not immediately 
noticeable, change. 

I was holding her in my arms and gazing into her eyes. 

Imperceptibly, almost instinctively, I began to pull her 
hands together behind her back at the same time search- 
ing the room with my eyes: I needed something with 
which to tie her hands. 

Suddenly she jerked her elbows together, and there 
followed a powerful recoil. I resisted for barely a second. 
Thrown backwards and almost lifted off my feet, even had 
I been an athlete I could not have freed myself. Rheya 
straightened up and dropped her arms to her sides. Her 
face, lit by an uncertain smile, had played no part in the 
struggle. 

She was gazing at me with the same calm interest as 


59 


when I had first awakened — as though she was utterly un- 
moved by my desperate ploy, as though she was quite 
unaware that anything had happened, and had not noticed 
my sudden panic. She stood before me, waiting — grave, 
passive, mildly surprised. 

Leaving Rheya in the middle of the room, I went over 
to the washbasin. I was a prisoner, caught in an absurd 
trap from which at all costs I was determined to escape. 
I would have been incapable of putting into words the 
meaning of what had happened or what was going 
through my mind; but now I realized that my situation was 
identical with that of the other inhabitants of the Station, 
that everything I had experienced, discovered or guessed 
at was part of a single whole, terrifying and incomprehen- 
sible. Meanwhile, I was racking my brain to think up some 
ruse, to work out some means of escape. Without turning 
round, I could feel Rheya’s eyes following me. There was 
a medicine chest above the basin. Quickly I went through 
its contents, and found a bottle of sleeping pills. I shook 
out four tablets — the maximum dose — into a glass, and 
filled it with hot water. I made little effort to conceal my 
actions from Rheya. Why? I did not even bother to ask 
myself. 

When the tablets had dissolved, I returned to Rheya, 
who was still standing in the same place. 

“Are you angry with me?” she asked, in a low voice. 

“No. Drink this.” 

Unconsciously, I had known all along that she would 
obey me. She took the glass without a word and drank the 
scalding mixture in one gulp. Putting down the empty 
glass on a stool, I went and sat in a chair in the corner of 
the room. 

Rheya joined me, squatting on the floor in her accus- 
tomed manner with her legs folded under her, and toss- 
ing back her hair. I was no longer under any illusion: this 
was not Rheya — and yet I recognized her every habitual 
gesture. Horror gripped me by the throat; and what was 
most horrible was that I must go on tricking her, pretend- 
ing to take her for Rheya, while she herself sincerely be- 
lieved that she was Rheya — of that I was certain, if one 


60 


could be certain of anything any longer. 

She was leaning against my knees, her hair brushing my 
hand. We remained thus for some while. From time to 
time, I glanced at my watch. Half-an-hour went by; the 
sleeping tablets should have started to work. Rheya mur- 
mured something: 

“What did you say?” 

There was no reply. 

Although I attributed her silence to the onset of sleep, 
secretly I doubted the effectiveness of the pills. Once 
again, I did not ask myself why. Perhaps it was because my 
subterfuge seemed too simple. 

Slowly her head slid across my knees, her dark hair 
falling over her face. Her breathing grew deeper and 
more regular; she was asleep. I stooped in order to lift her 
on to the bed. As I did so, her eyes opened; she put her 
arms round my neck and burst into shrill laughter. 

I was dumbfounded. Rheya could hardly contain her 
mirth. With an expression that was at once ingenuous and 
sly, she observed me through half-closed eyelids. I sat 
down again, tense, stupefied, at a loss. With a final burst 
of laughter, she snuggled against my legs. 

In an expressionless voice, I asked: 

“Why are you laughing?” 

Once again, a look of anxiety and surprise came over 
her face. It was clear that she wanted to give me an honest 
explanation. She sighed, and rubbed her nose like a child. 

“I don’t know,” she said at last, with genuine puzzle- 
ment. “I’m behaving like an idiot, aren’t I? But so are you 
. . . you look idiotic, all stiff and pompous like . . . like 
Pelvis.” 

I could hardly believe my ears. 

“Like who?” 

“Like Pelvis. You know who I mean, that fat man. . . .” 

Rheya could not possibly have known Pelvis, or even 
heard me mention him, for the simple reason that he had 
returned from an expedition three years after her death. 
I had not known him previously and was therefore una- 
ware of his inveterate habit, when presiding over meet- 
ings at the Institute, of letting sessions drag on 


61 


indefinitely. Moreover, his name was Pelle Villis and until 
his return I did not know that he had been nicknamed 
Pelvis. 

Rheya leaned her elbows on my knees and looked me 
in the eyes. I put out my hand and stroked her arms, her 
shoulders and the base of her bare neck, which pulsed 
beneath my fingers. While it looked as though I was ca- 
ressing her (and indeed, judging by her expression, that 
was how she interpreted the touch of my hands) in reality 
I was verifying once again that her body was warm to the 
touch, an ordinary human body, with muscles, bones, 
joints. Gazing calmly into her eyes, I felt a hideous desire 
to tighten my grip. 

Suddenly I remembered Snow’s bloodstained hands, 
and let go. 

“How you stare at me,” Rheya said, placidly. 

My heart was beating so furiously that I was incapable 
of speech. I closed my eyes. In that very instant, complete 
in every detail, a plan of action sprang to my mind. There 
was not a second to lose. I stood up. 

“I must go out, Rheya. If you absolutely insist on com- 
ing with me. I’ll take you.” 

“Good.” 

She jumped to her feet. 

I opened the locker and selected a suit for each of us. 
Then I asked: 

“Why are you bare-foot?” 

She answered hesitantly: 

“I don’t know ... I must have left my shoes some- 
where.” 

I did not pursue the matter. 

“You’ll have to take your dress off to put this on.” 

“Flying-overalls? What for?” 

As she tried to take off her dress, an extraordinary fact 
became apparent: there were no zips, or fastenings of any 
sort; the red buttons down the front were merely decora- 
tive. Rheya smiled, embarrassed. 

As though it were the most normal way of going about 
it, I picked up some kind of scalpel from the floor and slit 
the dress down the back from neck to waist, so that she 
could pull it over her head. 


62 


When she had put on the flying-overalls (which were 
slightly too large for her) and we were about to leave, she 
asked: 

“Are we going on a flight?” 

I merely nodded. I was afraid of running into Snow. But 
the dome was empty and the door leading to the radio 
cabin was shut. 

A deathly silence still hung over the hangar-deck. Rheya 
followed my movements attentively. I opened a stall and 
examined the shuttle vehicle inside. I checked, one after 
another, the micro-reactor, the controls, and the diffus- 
ers. Then, having removed the empty capsule from its 
stand, I aimed the electric trolley towards the sloping 
runway. 

I had chosen a small shuttle used for ferrying stores 
between the Station and the satellite, one that did not 
normally carry personnel since it did not open from the 
inside. The choice was carefully calculated in accordance 
with my plan. Of course, I had no intention of launching 
it, but I simulated the preparations for an actual depar- 
ture. Rheya, who had so often accompanied me on my 
space-flights, was familiar with the preliminary routine. 
Inside the cockpit, I checked that the climatization and 
oxygen-supply systems were functioning. I switched in 
the main circuit and the indicators on the instrument 
panel lit up. I climbed out and said to Rheya, who was 
waiting at the foot of the ladder: 

“Get in.” 

“What about you?” 

“I’ll follow you. I have to close the hatch behind us.” 

She gave no sign that she suspected any trickery. When 
she had disappeared inside, I stuck my head into the 
opening and asked: 

“Are you comfortable?” 

I heard a muffled “yes” from inside the confined cock- 
pit. I withdrew my head and slammed the hatch to with all 
my strength. I slid home the two bolts and tightened the 
five safety screws with the special spanner I had brought 
with me. The slender metal cigar stood there, pointing 
upwards, as though it were really about to take off into 
space. 


63 



Its captive was in no danger: the oxygen-tanks were full 
and there were food supplies in the cockpit. In any case, 
I did not intend to keep her prisoner indefinitely. I des- 
perately needed two hours of freedom in order to concen- 
trate on the decisions which had to be taken and to work 
out a joint plan of action with Snow. 

As I was tightening the last screw but one, I felt a vibra- 
tion in the three-pronged clamp which held the base of the 
shuttle. I thought I must have loosened the support in my 
over-eager handling of the heavy spanner, but when I 
stepped back to take a look, I was greeted by a spectacle 
which I hope I shall never have to see again. 

The whole vehicle trembled, shaken from the inside as 
though by some superhuman force. Not even a steel robot 
could have imparted such a convulsive tremor to an 8-ton 
mass, and yet the cabin contained only a frail, dark-haired 
girl. 

The reflections from the lights quivered on the shuttle’s 
gleaming sides. I could not hear the blows; there was no 
sound whatever from inside the vehicle. But the outspread 
struts vibrated like taut wires. The violence of the shock- 
waves was such that I was afraid the entire scaffolding 
would collapse. 

I tightened the final screw with a trembling hand, threw 
down the spanner and jumped off the ladder. As I slowly 
retreated, I noticed that the shock-absorbers, designed to 
resist a continuous pressure, were vibrating furiously. It 
looked to me as though the shuttle’s outer skin was wrin- 
kling. 

Frenziedly, I rushed to the control panel and with both 
hands lifted the starting lever. As I did so the intercom 
connected to the shuttle’s interior gave out a piercing 
sound— not a cry, but a sound which bore not the slightest 
resemblance to the human voice, in which I could never- 
theless just make out my name, repeated over and over 
again: “Kris! Kris! Kris!” 

I had attacked the controls so violently, fumbling in my 
haste, that my fingers were torn and bleeding. 

A bluish glimmer, like that of a ghostly dawn, lit up the 
walls. Swirling clouds of vaporous dust eddied round the 


64 


launching pad; the dust turned into a column of fierce 
sparks and the echoes of a thunderous roar drowned all 
other noise. Three flames, merging instantly into a single 
pillar of fire, lifted the craft, which rose up through the 
open hatch in the dome, leaving behind a glowing trail 
which rippled as it gradually subsided. Shutters slid over 
the hatch, and the automatic ventilators began to suck in 
the acrid smoke which billowed round the room. 

It was only later that I remembered all these details; at 
the time, I hardly knew what I was seeing. Clinging to the 
control-panel, the fierce heat burning my face and singe- 
ing my hair, I gulped the acrid air which smelt of a mixture 
of burning fuel and the ozone given off by ionization. I 
had instinctively closed my eyes at the moment of lift-off, 
but the glare had penetrated my eyelids. For some time, 
I saw nothing but black, red and gold spirals which slowly 
died away. The ventilators continued to hum; the smoke 
and the dust were gradually clearing. 

The green glow of the radar-screen caught my eye. My 
hands flew across its controls as I began to search for the 
shuttle. By the time I had located it, it was already flying 
above the atmosphere. I had never launched a vehicle in 
such a blind and unthinking way, with no pre-set speed or 
direction. I did not even know its range and was afraid of 
causing some unpredictable disaster. I judged that the 
easiest thing to do would be to place it in a stationary orbit 
around Solaris and then cut the engines. I verified from 
the tables that the required altitude was 725 miles. It was 
no guarantee, of course, but I could see no other way out. 

I did not have the heart to switch on the intercom, which 
had been disconnected at lift-off. I could not bear to ex- 
pose myself again to the sound of that horrifying voice, 
which was no longer even remotely human. 

I felt I was justified in thinking that I had defeated the 
‘simulacra,’ and that behind the illusion, contrary to all 
expectation, I had found the real Rheya again — the Rheya 
of my memories, whom the hypothesis of madness would 
have destroyed. 

At one o’clock, I left the hangar-deck. 


65 


“The Little Apocrypha” 


My face and hands were badly burnt. I remembered notic- 
ing a jar of anti-burn ointment when I was looking for 
sleeping pills for Rheya (I was in no mood to laugh at my 
naivete), so I went back to my room. 

I opened the door. The room was glowing in the red 
twilight. Someone was sitting in the armchair where 
Rheya had knelt. For a second or two, I was paralysed with 
terror, filled with an overwhelming desire to turn and run. 
Then the seated figure raised its head: it was Snow. His 
legs crossed, still wearing the acid-stained trousers, he 
was looking through some papers, a pile of which lay on 
a small table beside him. He put down those he was hold- 
ing in his hand, let his glasses slide down his nose, and 
scowled up at me. 

Without saying a word, I went to the basin, took the 
ointment out of the medicine chest and applied it to my 
forehead and cheeks. Fortunately my face was not too 
swollen and my eyes, which I had closed instinctively, did 
not seem to be inflamed. I lanced some large blisters on 
my temples and cheekbones with a sterilized needle; they 
exuded a serous liquid, which I mopped up with an an- 
tiseptic pad. Then I applied some gauze dressing. 

Snow watched me throughout these first-aid opera- 
tions, but I paid no attention to him. When at last I had 


66 


finished ( and my burns had become even more painful), 
I sat myself down in the other chair. I had first to remove 
Rheya’s dress — that apparently quite normal dress which 
was nevertheless devoid of fastenings. 

Snow, his hands clasped around one bony knee, con- 
tinued to observe me with a critical air. 

“Well, are you ready to have a chat?” he asked. 

I did not answer; I was busy replacing a piece of gauze 
which had slipped down one cheek. 

“You’ve had a visitor, haven’t you?” 

“Yes,” I answered curtly. 

He had begun the conversation on a note which I found 
displeasing. 

“And you’ve rid yourself of it already? Well, well! That 
was quick!” 

He touched his forehead, which was still peeling and 
mottled with pink patches of new skin. I was thunder- 
struck. Why had I not realized before the implications of 
Snow’s and Sartorius’s ‘sunburn’? No one exposed him- 
self to the sun here. 

Without noticing my sudden change of expression he 
went on: 

“I imagine you didn’t try extreme methods straight 
away. What did you use first— drugs, poison, judo?” 

“Do you want to discuss the thing seriously or play the 
fool ? If you don’t want to help, you can leave me in peace.” 

He half-closed his eyes. 

“Sometimes one plays the fool in spite of oneself. Did 
you try the rope, or the hammer? Or the well-aimed ink- 
bottle, like Luther? No?” He grimaced. “Aren’t you a fast 
worker! The basin is still intact, you haven’t banged your 
head against the walls, you haven’t even turned the room 
upside down. One, two and into the rocket, just like that!” 
He looked at his watch. “Consequently, we have two or 
three hours at our disposal. . . . Am I getting on your 
nerves?” he added, with a disagreeable smile. 

“Yes,” I said curtly. 

“Really? Well, if I tell you a little story, will you believe 
me?” 

I said nothing. 


67 


Still with that hideous smile, he went on: 

“It started with Gibarian. He locked himself in his cabin 
and refused to talk to us except through the door. And can 
you guess what we thought?” 

I remained silent. 

“Naturally, we thought he had gone mad. He let a bit 
of it out — through the locked door — but not everything. 
You may wonder why he didn’t tell us that there was some- 
one with him. Oh, suum cuiqw! But he was a true scientist. 
He begged us to let him take his chance!” 

“What chance?” 

“He was obviously doing his damnedest to solve the 
problem, to get to the bottom of it. He worked day and 
night. You know what he was doing? You must know.” 

“Those calculations, in the drawer of the radio cabin — 
were they his?” 

“Yes.” 

“How long did it go on?” 

“This visit? About a week . . . We thought he was suffer- 
ing from hallucinations, or having a nervous breakdown. 
I gave him some scopolamine.” 

“Gave him?” 

“Yes. He took it, but not for himself. He tried it out on 
someone else.” 

“What did you do?” 

“On the third day we had decided, if all else failed, to 
break down the door, maybe injuring his self-esteem, but 
at least curing him.” 

“Ah . . .” 

“Yes.” 

“So, in that locker. . . .” 

“Yes, my friend, quite. But in the meantime, we too had 
received visitors. We had our hands full, and didn’t have 
a chance to tell him what was going on. Now it’s . . . it’s 
become a routine.” 

He spoke so softly that I guessed rather than heard the 
last few words. 

“I still don’t understand!” I exclaimed. “If you listened 
at his door, you must have heard two voices.” 

“No, we heard only his voice. There were strange 


68 


noises, but we thought they came from him too.” 

“Only his voice! But how is it that you didn’t hear . . . 
her?” 

“I don’t know. I have the rudiments of a theory about 
it, but I’ve dropped it for the moment. No point getting 
bogged down in details. But what about you? You must 
already have seen something yesterday, otherwise you 
would have taken us for lunatics.” 

“I thought it was I who had gone mad.” 

“So you didn’t see anyone?” 

“I saw someone.” 

“Who?” 

I gave him a long look — he no longer wore even the 
semblance of a smile — and answered: 

“That . . . that black woman . . .” He was leaning for- 
ward, and as I spoke his body almost imperceptibly 
relaxed. “You might have warned me.” 

“I did warn you.” 

“You could have chosen a better way!” 

“It was the only way possible. I didn’t know what you 
would see. No one could know, no one ever knows . . 

“Listen, Snow, I want to ask you something. You’ve had 
some experience of this . . . phenomenon. Will she . . . will 
the person who visited me today . . . ?” 

“Will she come back, do you mean?” 

I nodded. 

“Yes and no,” he said. 

“What does that mean?” 

“She . . . this person will come back as though nothing 
had happened, just as she was at the beginning of her first 
visit. More precisely, she will appear not to realize what 
you did to get rid of her. If you abide by the rules, she 
won’t be aggressive.” 

“What rules?” 

“That depends on the circumstances.” 

“Snow!” 

“What?” 

“Don’t let’s waste time talking in riddles.” 

“In riddles? Kelvin, I’m afraid you still don’t under- 
stand.” His eyes glittered. “All right, then!” he went on, 


69 


brutally. “Can you tell me who your visitor was?” 

I swallowed my saliva and turned away. I did not want 
to look at him. I would have preferred to be dealing with 
anyone else but him; but I had no choice. A piece of gauze 
came unstuck and fell on my hand. I gave a start. 

“A woman who ...” I stopped. “She died. An injec- 
tion . . .” 

“Suicide?” 

“Yes.” 

“Is that all?” 

He waited. Seeing that I remained silent, he murmured: 

“No, it’s not all . . .” 

I looked up quickly; he was not looking at me. 

“How did you guess?” He said nothing. “It’s true, 
there’s more to it than that.” I moistened my lips. “We 
quarrelled. Or rather, I lost my temper and said a lot of 
things I didn’t mean. I packed my bags and cleared out. 
She had given me to understand . . . not in so many words 
— when one’s lived together for years it’s not necessary. 
I was certain she didn’t mean it, that she wouldn’t dare, 
she’d be too afraid, and I told her so. Next day, I remem- 
bered I’d left these . . . these ampoules in a drawer. She 
knew they were there. I’d brought them back from the 
laboratory because I needed them, and I had explained to 
her that the effect of a heavy dose would be lethal. I was 
a bit worried. I wanted to go back and get them, but I 
thought that would give the impression that I’d taken her 
remarks seriously. By the third day I was really worried 
and made up my mind to go back. When I arrived, she was 
dead.” 

“You poor innocent!” 

I looked up with a start. But Snow was not making fun 
of me. It seemed to me that I was seeing him now for the 
first time. His face was grey, and the deep lines between 
cheek and nose were evidence of an unutterable exhaus- 
tion: he looked a sick man. 

Curiously awed, I asked him: 

“Why did you say that?” 

“Because it’s a tragic story.” Seeing that I was upset, he 
added, hastily: “No, no, you still don’t understand. Of 


70 


course it’s a terrible burden to carry around, and you 
must feel like a murderer, but . . . there are worse thines.” 

‘‘Oh, really?” 6 

‘‘Yes, really. And I’m almost glad that you refuse to 
believe me. Certain events, which have actually happened, 
are horrible, but what is more horrible still is what hasn’t 
happened, what has never existed.” 

“What are you saying?” I asked, my voice faltering. 

He shook his head from side to side. 

“A normal man,” he said. “What is a normal man? A 
man who has never committed a disgraceful act? Maybe, 
but has he never had uncontrollable thoughts? Perhaps he 
hasn’t. But perhaps something, a phantasm, rose up from 
somewhere within him, ten or thirty years ago, something 
which he suppressed and then forgot about, which he 
doesn’t fear since he knows he will never allow it to de- 
velop and so lead to any action on his part. And now, 
suddenly, in broad daylight, he comes across this thing 
. . . this thought, embodied, riveted to him, indestructible. 
He wonders where he is ... Do you know where he is?” 

“Where?” 

“Here,” whispered Snow, “on Solaris.” 

“But what does it mean? After all, you and Sartorius 
aren’t criminals. . . .” 

“And you call yourself a psychologist, Kelvin! Who 
hasn t had, at some moment in his life, a crazy daydream, 
an obsession? Imagine . . . imagine a fetishist who 
becomes infatuated with, let’s say, a grubby piece of cloth, 
and who threatens and entreats and defies every risk in 
order to acquire this beloved bit of rag. A peculiar idea, 
isn’t it? A man who at one and the same time is ashamed 
of the object of his desire and cherishes it above every- 
thing else, a man who is ready to sacrifice his life for his 
love, since the feeling he has for it is perhaps as over- 
whelming as Romeo’s feeling for Juliet. Such cases exist, 
as you know. So, in the same way, there are things, situa- 
tions, that no one has dared to externalize, but which the 
mind has produced by accident in a moment of aberra- 
tion, of madness, call it what you will. At the next stage, 
the idea becomes flesh and blood. That’s all.” 


71 


Stupefied, my mouth dry, I repeated: 

“That’s all?” My head was spinning. “And what about 
the Station? What has it got to do with the Station?” 

“It’s almost as if you’re purposely refusing to under- 
stand,” he groaned. “I’ve been talking about Solaris the 
whole time, solely about Solaris. If the truth is hard to 
swallow, it’s not my fault. Anyhow, after what you’ve al- 
ready been through, you ought to be able to hear me out! 
We take off into the cosmos, ready for anything: for soli- 
tude, for hardship, for exhaustion, death. Modesty for- 
bids us to say so, but there are times when we think pretty 
well of ourselves. And yet, if we examine it more closely, 
our enthusiasm turns out to be all sham. We don’t want 
to conquer the cosmos, we simply want to extend the 
boundaries of Earth to the frontiers of the cosmos. For us, 
such and such a planet is as arid as the Sahara, another as 
frozen as the North Pole, yet another as lush as the Ama- 
zon basin. We are humanitarian and chivalrous; we don’t 
want to enslave other races, we simply want to bequeath 
them our values and take over their heritage in exchange. 
We think of ourselves as the Knights of the Holy Contact. 
This is another lie. We are only seeking Man. We have no 
need of other worlds. We need mirrors. We don’t know 
what to do with other worlds. A single world, our own, 
suffices us; but we can’t accept it for what it is. We are 
searching for an ideal image of our own world: we go in 
quest of a planet, of a civilization superior to our own but 
developed on the basis of a prototype of our primeval 
past. At the same time, there is something inside us which 
we don’t like to face up to, from which we try to protect 
ourselves, but which nevertheless remains, since we don’t 
leave Earth in a state of primal innocence. We arrive here 
as we are in reality, and when the page is turned and that 
reality is revealed to us — that part of our reality which we 
would prefer to pass over in silence — then we don’t like 
it any more.” 

I had listened to him patiently. 

“But what on earth are you talking about?” 

“I’m talking about what we all wanted: contact with an- 
other civilization. Now we’ve got it! And we can observe. 


72 


through a microscope, as it were, our own monstrous 
ugliness, our folly, our shame!” His voice shook with 
rage. 

“So . . . you think it’s . . . the ocean? That the ocean is 
responsible for it all? But why? I’m not asking how, I’m 
simply asking why? Do you seriously think that it wants to 
toy with us, or punish us — a sort of elementary demono- 
mania? A planet dominated by a huge devil, who satisfies 
the demands of his Satanic humour by sending succubi to 
haunt the members of a scientific expedition. . . ? Snow, 
you can’t believe anything so absurd!” 

He muttered under his breath. 

“This devil isn’t such a fool as all that . . .” 

I looked at him in amazement. Perhaps what had hap- 
pened, assuming that we had experienced it in our right 
minds, had finally driven him over the edge? A reaction 
psychosis? 

He was laughing to himself. 

“Making your diagnosis? Don’t be in too much of a 
hurry! You’ve only been through one ordeal — and that a 
reasonably mild one.” 

“Oh, so the devil had pity on me!” 

I was beginning to weary of this conversation. 

“What is it you want exactly?” Snow went on. “Do you 
want me to tell you what this mass of metamorphic plasma 
x-billion tons of metamorphic plasma — is scheming 
against us? Perhaps nothing.” 

“What do you mean, nothing?” 

Snow smiled. 

“You must know that science is concerned with 
phenomena rather than causes. The phenomena here be- 
gan to manifest themselves eight or nine days after that 
X-ray experiment. Perhaps the ocean reacted to the ir- 
radiation with a counter-irradiation, perhaps it probed 
our brains and penetrated to some kind of psychic tu- 
mor.” 

I pricked up my ears. 

“Tumor?” 

“Yes, isolated psychic processes, enclosed, stifled, en- 
cysted — foci smouldering under the ashes of memory. It 


73 


deciphered them and made use of them, in the same way 
as one uses a recipe or a blue-print. You know how alike 
the asymmetric crystalline structures of a chromosome 
are to those of the DNA molecule, one of the constituents 
of the cerebrosides which constitute the substratum of the 
memory-processes? This genetic substance is a plasma 
which ‘remembers.’ The ocean has ‘read’ us by this 
means, registering the minutest details, with the result 
that . . . well, you know the result. But for what purpose? 
Bah! At any rate, not for the purpose of destroying us. It 
could have annihilated us much more easily. As far as one 
can tell, given its technological resources, it could have 
done anything it wished — confronted me with your dou- 
ble, and you with mine, for example.” 

“So that’s why you were so alarmed when I arrived, the 
first evening!” 

“Yes. In fact, how do you know it hasn’t done so? How 
do you know I’m really the same old Ratface who landed 
here two years ago?” 

He went on laughing silently, enjoying my discomfi- 
ture, then he growled: 

“No, no, that’s enough of that! We’re two happy mor- 
tals; I could kill you, you could kill me.” 

“And the others, can’t they be killed?” 

“I don’t advise you to try — a horrible sight!” 

“Is there no means of killing them?” 

“I don’t know. Certainly not with poison, or a weapon, 
or by injection . . .” 

“What about a gamma pistol?” 

“Would you risk it?” 

“Since we know they’re not human . . 

“In a certain subjective sense, they are human. They 
know nothing whatsoever about their origins. You must 
have noticed that?” 

“Yes. But then, how do you explain. . . ?” 

“They . . . the whole thing is regenerated with extraor- 
dinary rapidity, at an incredible speed — in the twinkling of 
an eye. Then they start behaving again as . . .” 

“As?” 

“As we remember them, as they are engraved on our 
memories, following which . . .” 


74 


“Did Gibarian know?” I interrupted. 

“As much as we do, you mean?” 

“Yes.” 

“Very probably.” 

“Did he say anything to you?” 

“No. I found a book in his room . . 

I leapt to my feet. 

“The Little Apocrypha!” 

“Yes.” He looked at me suspiciously. “Who could have 
told you about that?” 

I shook my head. 

“Don’t worry, you can see that I’ve burnt my skin and 
that it’s not exactly renewing itself. No, Gibarian left a 
letter addressed to me in his cabin.” 

“A letter? What did it say?” 

“Nothing much. It was more of a note than a letter, with 
bibliographic references — allusions to the Supplement to 
the Annual and to the Apocrypha. What is this Apocrypha?” 

“An antique which seems to have some relevance to our 
situation. Here!” He drew from his pocket a small, lea- 
therbound volume, scuffed at the edges, and handed it to 
me. 

I grabbed the little book. 

“And what about Sartorius?” 

“Him! Everyone has his own way of coping. Sartorius 
is trying to remain normal — that is, to preserve his re- 
spectability as an envoy on an official mission.” 

“You’re joking!” 

“No, I’m quite serious. We were together on another 
occasion. I won’t bother you with the details, but there 
were eight of us and we were down to our last 1000 
pounds of oxygen. One after another, we gave up our 
chores, and by the end we all had beards except Sartorius. 
He was the only one who shaved and polished his shoes. 
He’s like that. Now, of course, he can only pretend, act a 
part — or else commit a crime.” 

“A crime?” 

“Perhaps that isn’t quite the right word. ‘Divorce by 
ejection!’ Does that sound better?” 

“Very funny!” 

“Suggest something else if you don’t like it.” 


75 


“Oh, leave me alone!” 

“No, let’s discuss the thing seriously. You know pretty 
well as much as I do by now. Have you got a plan?” 

“No, none. I haven’t the least idea what I’ll do when 
. . . when she comes back. She will return, if I’ve under- 
stood you correctly?” 

“It’s on the cards.” 

“How do they get in? The Station is hermetically 
sealed. Perhaps the layer on the outer hull ” 

He shook his head. 

“The outer hull is in perfect condition. I don’t know 
where they get in. Usually, they’re there when you wake 
up, and you have to sleep eventuallyl” 

“Could you barricade yourself securely inside a cabin?” 

“The barricades wouldn’t survive for long. There’s 
only one solution, and you can guess what that is . . .” 

We both stood up. 

“Just a minute. Snow! You’re suggesting we liquidate 
the Station and you expect me to take the initiative and 
accept the responsibility?” 

“It’s not as simple as that. Obviously, we could get out, 
if only as far as the satellite, and send an SOS from there. 
Of course, we’ll be regarded as lunatics; we’ll be shut up 
in a mad-house on Earth — unless we have the sense to 
retract. A distant planet, isolation, collective derange- 
ment— our case won’t seem at all out of the ordinary. But 
at least we’d be better off in a mental home than we are 
here: a quiet garden, little white cells, nurses, supervised 
walks . . .” 

Hands in his pockets, staring fixedly at a corner of the 
room, he spoke with the utmost seriousness. 

The red sun had disappeared over the horizon and the 
ocean was a sombre desert, mottled with dying gleams, 
the last rays lingering among the long tresses of the 
waves. The sky was ablaze. Purple-edged clouds drifted 
across this dismal red and black world.. 

“Well, do you want to get out, yes or no? Or not yet?” 

“Always the fighter! If you knew the full implications of 
what you’re asking, you wouldn’t be so insistent. It’s not 
a matter of what I want, it’s a matter of what’s possible.” 


76 


“Such as what?” 

“That’s the point, I don’t know.” 

“We stay here then? Do you think we’ll find some 
way . . . ?” 

Thin, sickly-looking, his peeling face deeply lined, he 
turned towards me: 

“It might be worth our while to stay. We’re unlikely to 
learn anything about it, but about ourselves . . 

He turned, picked up his papers, and went out. I 
opened my mouth to detain him, but no sound escaped 
my lips. 

There was nothing I could do now except wait. I went 
to the window and ran my eyes absently over the dark-red 
glimmer of the shadowed ocean. For a moment, I thought 
of locking myself inside one of the capsules on the han- 
gar-deck, but it was not an idea worth considering for 
long: sooner or later, I should have to come out again. 

I sat by the window, and began to leaf through the book 
Snow had given me. The glowing twilight lit up the room 
and colored the pages. It was a collection of articles and 
treatises edited by an Otho Ravintzer, Ph.D., and its gen- 
eral level was immediately obvious. Every science engen- 
ders some pseudo-science, inspiring eccentrics to 
explore freakish by-ways; astronomy has its parodists in 
astrology, chemistry used to have them in alchemy. It was 
not surprising, therefore, that Solaristics, in its early days, 
had set off an explosion of marginal cogitations. Ravint- 
zer’s book was full of this sort of intellectual speculation, 
prefaced, it is only fair to add, by an introduction in which 
the editor dissociated himself from some of the texts re- 
produced. He considered, with some justice, that such a 
collection could provide an invaluable period document 
as much for the historian as for the psychologist of 
science. 

Berton’s report, divided into two parts and complete 
with a summary of his log, occupied the place of honor in 
the book. 

From 14.00 hours to 16.40 hours, by expedition time, 
the entries in the log were laconic and negative. 

Altitude 3000 — or 3500 — 2500 feet ; nothing visible; ocean 


77 


empty. The same words recurred over and over again. 

Then, at 16.40 hours: A red mist rising. Visibility 700 yards. 
Ocean empty. 

17.00 hours: fog thickening; visibility 400 yards, with clear 
patches. Descending to 600 feet. 

17.20 hours: in fog. Altitude 600. Visibility 20 — 40 yards. 
Climbing to 1200. 

17.45: altitude 1500. Pall of fog to horizon. Funnel-shaped 
openings through which lean see ocean surface. Attempting to enter 
one of these clearings; something is moving. 

17.52: have spotted what appears to be a waterspout; it is throw- 
ing up a yellow foam. Surrounded by a wall of fog. Altitude 300. 
Descending to 60 feet. 

The extract from Berton’s log stopped at this point. 
There followed his case-history, or, more precisely, the 
statement dictated by Berton and interrupted at intervals 
by questions from the members of the Commission of 
Enquiry. 

BERTON: When I reached 100 feet it became very diffi- 
cult to maintain altitude because of the violent gusts of 
wind inside the cone. I had to hang on to the controls and 
for a short period — about ten or fifteen minutes — I did 
not look outside. I realized too late that a powerful under- 
tow was dragging me back into the fog. It wasn’t like an 
ordinary fog, it was a thick colloidal substance which 
coated my windows. I had a lot of trouble cleaning them; 
that fog— or glue rather— was obstinate stuff. Due to this 
resistance, the speed of my rotor-blades was reduced by 
thirty percent and I began losing height. I was afraid of 
capsizing on the waves; but, even at full power, I could 
maintain altitude but not increase it. I still had four boost- 
er-rockets left but felt the situation was not yet desperate 
enough to use them. The aircraft was shaken by shudder- 
ing vibrations that grew more and more violent. Thinking 
my rotor blades must have become coated with the gluey 
substance, I glanced at the overload indicator, but to my 
surprise it read zero. Since entering the fog, I had not 
seen the sun— only a red glow. I continued to fly around 


78 


in the hope of emerging into one of the funnels, which, 
after half an hour, was what happened. I found myself in 
a new ‘well,’ perfectly cylindrical in shape, and several 
hundred yards in diameter. The walls of the cylinder were 
formed by an enormous whirlpool of fog, spiralling up- 
wards. I struggled to keep in the middle, where the wind 
was less violent. It was then that I noticed a change in the 
ocean’s surface. The waves had almost completely disap- 
peared, and the upper layer of the fluid — or whatever the 
ocean is made of— was becoming transparent, with murky 
streaks here and there which gradually dissolved until, 
finally, it was perfectly clear. I could see distinctly to a 
depth of several yards. I saw a sort of yellow sludge which 
was sprouting vertical filaments. When these filaments 
emerged above the surface, they had a glassy sheen. Then 
they began to exude foam — they frothed — until the foam 
solidified; it was like a very thick treacle. These glutinous 
filaments merged and became intertwined; great bubbles 
swelled up on the surface and slowly began to change 
shape. Suddenly I realized that my machine was being 
driven towards the wall of fog. I had to manoeuver against 
the wind, and when I was able to look down again, I saw 
something which looked like a garden. Yes, a garden. 
Trees, hedges, paths — but it wasn’t a real garden; it was 
all made of the same substance, which had hardened and 
by now looked like yellow plaster. Beneath this garden, 
the ocean glittered. I came down as low as I dared in order 
to take a closer look. 

QUESTION: Did the trees and plants you saw have leaves 
on them? 

BERTON: No, the shapes were only approximate, like a 
model garden. That’s exactly what it was like: a model, but 
lifesize. All of a sudden, it began to crack; it broke up and 
split into dark crevices; a thick white liquid ran out and 
collected into pools, or else drained away. The ‘earth- 
quake’ became more violent, the whole thing boiled over 
and was buried beneath the foam. At the same time, the 
walls of the fog began to close in. I gained height rapidly 
and came clear at 1000 feet. 


79 


QUESTION: Are you absolutely sure that what you saw 
resembled a garden — there was no other possible inter- 
pretation? 

BERTON: Yes. I noticed several details. For example, I 
remember seeing a place where there were some boxes in 
a row. I realized later that they were probably beehives. 
QUESTION: You realized later? But not at the time, not 
at the moment when you actually saw them? 

BERTON: No, because everything looked as though it 
were made of plaster. But I saw something else. 
QUESTION: What was that? 

BERTON: I saw things which I can’t put a name to, be- 
cause I didn’t have time to examine them carefully. Under 
some bushes I thought I saw tools, long objects with 
prongs. They might have been plaster models of garden 
tools. But I’m not absolutely certain. Whereas I’m sure, 
quite certain, that I recognized an apiary. 

QUESTION: It didn’t occur to you that it might be an 
hallucination? 

BERTON: No. I thought it was a mirage. It never oc- 
curred to me that it was an hallucination because I felt 
perfectly well, and I had never see anything like it before. 
When I reached 1000 feet and took another look at the 
fog, it was pitted with more irregularly-shaped holes, 
rather like a piece of cheese. Some of these holes were 
completely hollow, and I could see the ocean waves; oth- 
ers were only shallow saucers in which something was 
bubbling. I descended another well and saw — the altime- 
ter read 120 feet — I saw a wall lying beneath the ocean 
surface. It wasn’t very deep and I could see it clearly 
beneath the waves. It seemed to be the wall of a huge 
building, pierced with rectangular openings, like win- 
dows. I even thought I could see something moving be- 
hind them, but I couldn’t be absolutely certain of that. The 
wall slowly broke the surface and a mucous bubbling liq- 
uid streamed down its sides. Then it suddenly broke in 
half and disappeared into the depths. 

I regained height and continued to fly above the fog, 
the machine almost touching it, until I discovered another 
clearing, much larger than the previous one. 


80 


While I was still some distance away, I noticed a pale, 
almost white, object floating on the surface. My first 
thought was that it was Fechner’s flying-suit, especially as 
it looked vaguely human in form. I brought the aircraft 
round sharply, afraid of losing my way and being unable 
to find the same spot again. The shape, the body, was 
moving; sometimes it seemed to be standing upright in 
the trough of the waves. I accelerated and went down so 
low that the machine bounced gently. I must have hit the 
crest of a huge wave I was overflying. The body — yes, it 
was a human body, not an atmosphere-suit — the body was 
moving. 

QUESTION: Did you see its face? 

BERTON: Yes. 

QUESTION: Who was it? 

BERTON: A child. 

QUESTION: What child? Did you recognize it? 
BERTON: No. At any rate, I don’t remember having seen 
it before. Besides, when I got closer — when I was forty 
yards away, or even sooner — I realized that it was no ordi- 
nary child. 

QUESTION: What do you mean? 

BERTON: I’ll explain. At first, I couldn’t understand what 
worried me about it; it was only after a minute or two that 
I realized: this child was extraordinarily large. Enormous, 
in fact. Stretched out horizontally, its body rose twelve 
feet above the surface of the ocean, I swear. I remembered 
that when I touched the wave, its face was a little higher 
than mine, even though my cockpit must have been at 
least ten feet above the ocean. 

QUESTION: If it was as big as that, what makes you say 
it was a child? 

BERTON: Because it was a tiny child. 

QUESTION: Do you realize, Berton, that your answer 
doesn’t make sense? 

BERTON: On the contrary. I could see its face, and it was 
a very young child. Besides, its proportions corresponded 
exactly to the proportions of a child’s body. It was a . . . 
babe in arms. No, I exaggerate. It was probably two or 
three years old. It had black hair and blue eyes — enor- 


81 


mous blue eyes! It was naked — completely naked — like a 
new-born baby. It was wet, or I should say glossy; its skin 
was shiny. I was shattered. I no longer thought it was a 
mirage. I could see this child so distinctly. It rose and fell 
with the waves; but apart from this general motion, it was 
making other movements, and they were horrible! 
QUESTION: Why? What was it doing? 

BERTON: It was more like a doll in a museum, only a 
living doll. It opened and closed its mouth, it made vari- 
ous gestures, horrible gestures. 

QUESTION: What do you mean? 

BERTON: I was watching it from about twenty yards away 
— I don’t suppose I went any closer. But, as I’ve already 
told you, it was enormous. I could see very clearly. Its eyes 
sparkled and you really would have thought it was a living 
child, if it hadn’t been for the movements, the gestures, 
as though someone was trying ... It was as though some- 
one else was responsible for the gestures . . . 
QUESTION: Try to be more explicit. 

BERTON: It’s difficult. I’m talking of an impression, 
more of an intuition. I didn’t analyze it, but I knew that 
those gestures weren’t natural. 

QUESTION: Do you mean, for example, that the hands 
didn’t move as human hands would move, because the 
joints were not sufficiently supple? 

BERTON: No, not at all. But . . . these movements had no 
meaning. Each of our movements means something, 
more or less, serves some purpose . . . 

QUESTION: Do you think so? The movements of an 
infant don’t have much meaning! 

BERTON: I know. But an infant’s movements are con- 
fused, random, uncoordinated. The movements I saw 
were . . . er . . . yes, that’s it, they were methodical move- 
ments. They were performed one after another, like a 
series of exercises; as though someone had wanted to 
make a study of what this child was capable of doing with 
its hands, its torso, its mouth. The face was more horrify- 
ing than the rest, because the human face has an expres- 
sion, and this face ... I don’t know how to describe it. It 
was alive, yes, but it wasn’t human. Or rather, the features 


82 


as a whole, the eyes, the complexion, were, but the expres- 
sion, the movements of the face, were certainly not. 
QUESTION: Were they grimaces? Do you know what 
happens to a person’s face during an epileptic fit? 
BERTON: Yes. I’ve watched an epileptic fit. I know what 
you mean. No, it was something quite different. Epilepsy 
provokes spasms, convulsions. The movements I’m talk- 
ing about were fluid, continuous, graceful . . . melodious, 
if one can say that of a movement. It’s the nearest defini- 
tion I can think of. But this face ... a face can’t divide itself 
into two — one half gay, the other sad, one half scowling 
and the other amiable, one half frightened and the other 
triumphant. But that’s how it was with this child’s face. In 
addition to that, all these movements and changes of ex- 
pression succeeded one another with unbelievable rapid- 
ity. I stayed down there a very short time, perhaps ten 
seconds, perhaps less. 

QUESTION: And you claim to have seen all that in such 
a short time? Besides, how do you know how long you 
were there? Did you check your chronometer? 
BERTON: No, but I’ve been flying for seventeen years 
and, in my job, one can measure instinctively, to the near- 
est second, the duration of what would be called an instant 
of time. It’s an acquired faculty, and essential for success- 
ful navigation. A pilot isn’t worth his salt if he can’t tell 
whether a particular phenomenon lasts five or ten sec- 
onds, whatever the circumstances. It’s the same with ob- 
servation. We learn, over the years, to take in everything 
at a glance. 

QUESTION: Is that all you saw? 

BERTON: No, but I don’t remember the rest so precisely. 
I suppose I must already have seen more than enough; my 
attention faltered. The fog began to close in, and I had to 
climb. I climbed, and for the first time in my life I all but 
capsized. My hands were shaking so much that I had diffi- 
culty in handling the controls. I think I shouted some- 
thing, called up the base, even though I knew we were not 
in radio contact. 

QUESTION: Did you then try and get back? 

BERTON: No. In the end, having gained height, I thought 


83 


to myself that Fechner was probably in the bottom of one 
of the wells. I know it sounds crazy, but that’s what I 
thought. I told myself that everything was possible, and 
that it would also be possible for me to find Fechner. I 
decided to investigate every clearing I came across along 
my route. At the third attempt I gave up. When I had 
regained height, I knew it was useless to persist after what 
I had just seen on this, the third, occasion. I couldn’t go 
on any longer. I should add, as you already know, that I 
was suffering from bouts of nausea and that I vomited in 
the cockpit. I couldn’t understand it; I have never been 
sick in my life. 

COMMENT: It was a symptom of poisoning. 

BERTON: Perhaps. I don’t know. But what I saw on this 
third occasion I did not imagine. That was not the effect 
of poisoning. 

QUESTION: How can you possibly know? 

BERTON: It wasn’t an hallucination. An hallucination is 
created by one’s own brain, wouldn’t you say? 
COMMENT: Yes. 

BERTON: Well, my brain couldn’t have created what I 
saw. I’ll never believe that. My brain wouldn’t have been 
capable of it. 

COMMENT: Get on with describing what it was! 
BERTON: Before I do so, I should like to know how the 
statements I’ve already made will be interpreted. 
QUESTION: What does that matter? 

BERTON: For me, it matters very much indeed. I have 
said that I saw things which I shall never forget. If the 
Commission recognizes, even with certain reservations, 
that my testimony is credible, and that a study of the ocean 
must be undertaken — I mean a study orientated in the 
light of my statements — then I’ll tell everything. But if the 
Commission considers that it is all delusions, then I 
refuse to say anything more. 

QUESTION: Why? 

BERTON: Because the contents of my hallucinations be- 
long to me and I don’t have to give an account of them, 
whereas I am obliged to give an account of what I saw on 
Solaris. 

QUESTION: Does that mean that you refuse to answer 


84 


any more questions until the expedition authorities have 
announced their findings? You realize, of course, that the 
Commission isn’t empowered to take an immediate deci- 
sion? 

BERTON: Yes. 

The first minute ended here. There followed a frag- 
ment of the second minute drawn up eleven days later. 

PRESIDENT: . . . after due consideration, the Commis- 
sion, composed of three doctors, three biologists, a 
physicist, a mechanical engineer and the deputy head of 
the expedition, has reached the conclusion that Berton’s 
report is symptomatic of hallucinations caused by atmos- 
pheric poisoning, consequent upon inflammation of the 
associative zone of the cerebral cortex, and that Berton’s 
account bears no, or at any rate no appreciable, relation 
to reality. 

BERTON: Excuse me, what does “no appreciable rela- 
tion” mean? In what proportion is reality appreciable or 
not? 

PRESIDENT: I haven’t finished. Independently of these 
conclusions, the Commission has duly registered a dis- 
senting vote from Dr. Archibald Messenger, who consid- 
ers the phenomena described by Berton to be objectively 
possible and declares himself in favor of a scrupulous 
investigation. 

BERTON: I repeat my question. 

PRESIDENT: The answer is simple. “No appreciable re- 
lation to reality” means that phenomena actually ob- 
served may have formed the basis of your hallucinations. 
In the course of a nocturnal stroll, a perfectly sane man 
can imagine he sees a living creature in a bush stirred by 
the wind. Such illusions are all the more likely to affect an 
explorer lost on a strange planet and breathing a poiso- 
nous atmosphere. This verdict is in no way prejudicial to 
you, Berton. Will you now be good enough to let us know 
your decision? 

BERTON: First of all, I should like to know the possible 
consequences of this dissenting vote of Dr. Messenger’s. 
PRESIDENT: Virtually none. We shall carry on our work 
along the lines originally laid down. 

BERTON: Is our interview on record? 


85 


PRESIDENT: Yes. 

BERTON: In that case, I should like to say that although 
the Commission’s decision may not be prejudicial to me 
personally, it is prejudicial to the spirit of the expedition 
itself. Consequently, as I have already stated, I refuse to 
answer any further questions. 

PRESIDENT: Is that all? 

BERTON: Yes. Except that I should like to meet Dr. Mes- 
senger. Is that possible? 

PRESIDENT: Of course. 

That was the end of the second minute. At the bottom 
of the page there was a note in minuscule handwriting to 
the effect that, the following day, Dr. Messenger had 
talked to Berton for nearly three hours. As a result of this 
conversation. Messenger had once more begged the ex- 
pedition Council to undertake further investigations in 
order to check the pilot’s statements. Berton had pro- 
duced some new and extremely convincing revelations, 
which Messenger could not divulge unless the Council 
reversed its negative decision. The Council— Shannahan, 
Timolis and Trahier— rejected the motion and the affair 
was closed. 

The book also reproduced a photocopy of the last page 
of a letter, or rather, the draft of a letter, found by Messen- 
ger’s executors after his death. Ravintzer, in spite of his 
researches, had been unable to discover if this letter had 
ever been sent. 

“• • • obtuse minds, a pyramid of stupidity,” — the text 
began. “Anxious to preserve its authority, the Council — 
more precisely Shannahan and Timolis (Trahier’s vote 
doesn’t count) — has rejected my recommendations. Now 
I am taking the matter up directly with the Institute; but, 
as you can well imagine, my protestations won’t convince 
anybody. Bound as I am by oath, I can’t, alas, reveal to you 
what Berton told me. If the Council disregarded Berton’s 
testimony, it was basically because Berton has no scien- 
tific training, although any scientist would envy the pres- 
ence of mind and the gift of observation shown by this 
pilot. I should be grateful if you could send me the follow- 
ing information by return post: 


86 


i) Fechner’s biography, in particular details about his 
childhood. 

ii) Everything you know about his family, facts and dates 
— he probably lost his parents while still a child. 

iii) The topography of the place where he was brought up. 

I should like once more to tell you what I think about 

all this. As you know, some time after the departure of 
Fechner and Carucci, a spot appeared in the centre of the 
red sun. This chromospheric eruption caused a magnetic 
storm chiefly over the southern hemisphere, where our 
base was situated, according to the information provided 
by the satellite, and the radio links were cut. The other 
parties were scouring the planet’s surface over a relatively 
restricted area, whereas Fechner and Carucci had tra- 
velled a considerable distance from the base. 

Never, since our arrival on the planet, had we observed 
such a persistent fog or such an unremitting silence. 

I imagine that what Berton saw was one of the phases 
of a kind of ‘Operation Man’ which this viscous monster 
was engaged in. The source of all the various forms ob- 
served by Berton is Fechner — or rather, Fechner’s brain, 
subjected to an unimaginable ‘psychic dissection’ for the 
purposes of a sort of re-creation, an experimental recon- 
struction, based on impressions (undoubtedly the most 
durable ones) engraved on his memory. 

I know this sounds fantastic; I know that I may be mis- 
taken. But do please help me. At the moment, I am on the 
Alaric, where I look forward to receiving your reply. 

Yours, 

A.” 

It was a growing dark, and I could scarcely make out the 
blurred print at the top of the grey page — the last page 
describing Berton’s adventure. For my part, my own ex- 
perience led me to regard Berton as a trustworthy wit- 
ness. 

I turned towards the window. A few clouds still glowed 
like dying embers above the horizon. The ocean was in- 
visible, blanketed by the purple darkness. 


87 


The strips of paper fluttered idly beneath the air-vents. 
There was a whiff of ozone in the still, warm air. 

There was nothing heroic in our decision to remain on 
the Station. The time for heroism was over, vanished with 
the era of the great interplanetary triumphs, of daring 
expeditions and sacrifices. Fechner, the ocean’s first vic- 
tim, belonged to a distant past. I had almost stopped 
caring about the identity of Snow’s and Sartorius’s 
visitors. Soon I told myself, we would cease to be 
ashamed, to keep ourselves apart. If we could not get rid 
of our visitors, we would accustom ourselves to their 
presence, learn to live with them. If their Creator altered 
the rules of the game, we would adapt ourselves to the new 
rules, even if at first we jibbed or rebelled, even if one of 
us despaired and killed himself. Eventually, a certain equi- 
librium would be reestablished. 

Night had come; no different from many nights on 
Earth. Now I could make out only the white contours of 
the basin and the smooth surface of the mirror. 

I stood up. Groping my way to the basin, I fumbled 
among the objects which cluttered up the shelf, and found 
the packet of cotton wool. I washed my face with a damp 
wad and stretched out on the bed. 

A moth fluttered its wings. . . no, it was the ventilator- 
strip. The whirring stopped, then started up again. I could 
no longer see the window; everything had merged into 
darkness. A mysterious ray of light pierced the blackness 
and lingered in front of me— against the wall, or the black 
sky? I remembered how the blank stare of the night had 
frightened me the day before, and I smiled at the thought. 
I was no longer afraid of the night; I was not afraid of 
anything. I raised my wrist and looked at the ring of phos- 
phorescent figures; another hour, and the blue day would 
dawn. 

I breathed deeply, savoring the darkness, my mind 
empty and at rest. 

Shifting my position, I felt the flat shape of the tape- 
recorder against my hip: Gibarian, his voice immortalized 
on the spools of tape. I had forgotten to resurrect him, to 
listen to him — the only thing I could do for him any more. 


88 


I took the tape-recorder out of my pocket in order to hide 
it under the bed. 

I heard a rustling sound; the door opened. 

“Kris?” An anxious voice whispered my name. “Kris, 
are you there? It’s so dark. . 

I answered: 

“Yes, I’m here. Don’t be frightened, come!” 


89 


The Conference 


I was lying on my back, with Rheya’s head resting on my 
shoulder. 

The darkness was peopled now. I could hear footsteps. 
Something was piling up above me, higher and higher, 
infinitely high. The night transfixed me; the night look 
possession of me, enveloped and penetrated me, impal- 
pable, insubstantial. Turned to stone, I had ceased 
breathing, there was no air to breathe. As though from a 
distance, I heard the beating of my heart. I summoned up 
all my remaining strength, straining every nerve, and 
waited for death. I went on waiting. . . I seemed to be 
growing smaller, and the invisible sky, horizonless, the 
formless immensity of space, without clouds, without 
stars, receded, extended and grew bigger all round me. I 
tried to crawl out of bed, but there was no bed; beneath 
the cover of darkness there was a void. I pressed my hands 
to my face. I no longer had any fingers or any hands. I 
wanted to scream. . . 

The room floated in a blue penumbra, which outlined 
the furniture and the laden bookshelves, and drained ev- 
erything of color. A pearly whiteness flooded the window. 

I was drenched with sweat. I glanced to one side. Rheya 
was gazing at me. 

She raised her head. 


90 


“Has your arm gone to sleep?” 

Her eyes too had been drained of color; they were grey, 
but luminous, beneath the black lashes. 

“What?” Her murmured words had seemed like a ca- 
ress even before I understood their meaning. “No. Ah, 
yes!” I said, at last. 

I put my hand on her shoulder; I had pins and needles 
in my fingers. 

“Did you have a bad dream?” she asked. 

I drew her to me with my other hand. 

“A dream? Yes, I was dreaming. And you, didn’t you 
sleep?” 

“I don’t know. I don’t think so. I’m sleepy. But that 
mustn’t stop you from sleeping. . . Why are you looking 
at me like that?” 

I closed my eyes. Her heart was beating against mine. 
Her heart? A mere appendage, I told myself. But nothing 
surprised me any longer, not even my own indifference. 
I had crossed the frontiers of fear and despair. I had come 
a long way — further than anyone had ever come before. 

I raised myself on my elbow. Daybreak. . . and the peace 
that comes with dawn? A silent storm had set the cloudless 
horizon ablaze. A streak of light, the first ray of the blue 
sun, penetrated the room and broke up into sharp-edged 
reflections; there was a crossfire of sparks, which corus- 
cated off the mirror, the door-handles, the nickel pipes. 
The light scattered, falling on to every smooth surface as 
though it wanted to conquer ever more space, to set the 
room alight. I looked at Rheya; the pupils of her grey eyes 
had contracted. 

She asked in an expressionless voice, “Is the night over 
already?” 

“Night never lasts long here.” 

“And us?” 

“What about us?” 

“Are we going to stay here long?” 

Coming from her, the question had its comic side; but 
when I spoke, my voice held no trace of gaiety. 

“Quite a long time, probably. Why, don’t you want to 
stay here?” 


91 


Her eyes did not blink. She was looking at me inquir- 
ingly. Did I see her blink? I was not sure. She drew back 
the blanket and I saw the little pink scar on her arm. 

“Why are you looking at me like that?” 

“Because you’re very beautiful.” 

She smiled, without a trace of mischief, modestly ac- 
knowledging my compliment. 

“Really? It’s as though. . . as though. . . ” 

“What?” 

“As though you were doubtful of something.” 

“What nonsense!” 

As though you didn’t trust me and I were hiding some- 
thing from you. . .” 

“Rubbish!” 

“By the way you’re denying it, I can tell I’m right.” 

The light became blinding. Shading my eyes with my 
hand, I looked for my dark glasses. They were on the 
table. When I was back by her side, Rheya smiled. 

“What about me?” 

It took me a minute to understand what she meant. 

“Dark glasses?” 

I got up and began to hunt through drawers and 
shelves, pushing aside books and instruments. I found 
two pairs of glasses, which I gave to Rheya. They were too 
big; they fell half way down her nose. 

The shutters slid over the window; it was dark once 
more. Groping, I helped Rheya remove her glasses and 
put both pairs down under the bed. 

“What shall we do now?” she asked. 

“At night-time, one sleeps!” 

“Kris. . . ” 

“Yes?” 

“Do you want a compress for your forehead?” 

“No, thanks. Thank you. . . my darling.” 

I don’t know why I had added those two words. In the 
darkness, I took her by her graceful shoulders. I felt them 
tremble, and I knew, without the least shadow of doubt, 
that I held Rheya in my arms. Or rather, I understood in 
that moment that she was not trying to deceive me; it was 
I who was deceiving her, since she sincerely believed her- 
self to be Rheya. 


92 


I dropped off several times after that, and each time an 
anguished start jolted me awake. Panting, exhausted, I 
pressed myself closer to her; my heart gradually growing 
calmer. She touched me cautiously on the cheeks and 
forehead with the tips of her fingers, to see whether or not 
I was feverish. It was Rheya, the real Rheya, the one and 
only Rheya. 

A change came over me; I ceased to struggle and al- 
most at once I fell asleep. 

I was awakened by an agreeable sensation of coolness. 
My face was covered by a damp cloth. I pulled it off and 
found Rheya leaning over me. She was smiling and 
squeezing out a second cloth over a bowl. 

“What a sleep!” she said, laying another compress on 
my forehead. “Are you ill?” 

“No.” 

I wrinkled my forehead; the skin was supple once again. 
Rheya sat on the edge of my bed, her black hair brushed 
back over the collar of a bathrobe — a man’s bathrobe, 
with orange and black stripes, the sleeves turned back to 
the elbow. 

I was terribly hungry; it was at least twenty hours since 
my last meal. When Rheya had finished her ministrations 
I got up. Two dresses, draped over the back of a chair 
caught my eye — two absolutely identical white dresses, 
each decorated with a row of red buttons. I myself had 
helped Rheya out of one of them, and she had reappeared, 
yesterday evening, dressed in the second. 

She followed my glance. 

“I had to cut the seam open with scissors,” she said. “I 
think the zip fastener must have got stuck.” 

The sight of the two identical dresses filled me with a 
horror which exceeded anything I had felt hitherto. Rheya 
was busy tidying up the medicine chest. I turned my back 
and bit my knuckles. Unable to take my eyes off the two 
dresses — or rather the original dress and its double — I 
backed towards the door. The basin tap was running 
noisily. I opened the door and, slipping out of the room, 
cautiously closed it behind me. I heard the sound of run- 
ning water, the clinking of bottles; then, suddenly, all 
sound ceased. I waited, my jaw clenched, my hands grip- 


93 


ping the door handle, but with little hope of holding it 
shut. It was nearly torn from my grasp by a savage jerk. 
But the door did not open; it shook and vibrated from top 
to bottom. Dazed, I let go of the handle and stepped back. 
The panel, made of some plastic material, caved in as 
though an invisible person at my side had tried to break 
into the room. The steel frame bent further and further 
inwards and the paint was cracking. Suddenly I under- 
stood: instead of pushing the door, which opened out- 
wards, Rheya was trying to open it by pulling it towards 
her. The reflection of the lighting strip in the ceiling was 
distorted in the white-painted door-panel; there was a 
resounding crack and the panel, forced beyond its limits, 
gave way. Simultaneously the handle vanished, torn from 
its mounting. Two bloodstained hands appeared, thrust- 
ing through the opening and smearing the white paint 
with blood. The door split in two, the broken halves hang- 
ing askew on their hinges. First a face appeared, deathly 
pale, then a wild-looking apparition, dressed in an orange 
and black bathrobe, flung itself sobbing upon my chest. 

I wanted to escape, but it was too late, and I was rooted 
to the spot. Rheya was breathing convulsively, her dis- 
hevelled head drumming against my chest. Before I could 
put my arms round her to hold her up, Rheya collapsed. 

Avoiding the ragged edges of the broken panel, I car- 
ried her into the room and laid her on the bed. Her finger- 
tips were grazed and the nails torn. When her hands 
turned upwards, I saw that the palms were cut to the bone. 
I examined her face; her glazed eyes showed no sign of 
recognition. 

“Rheya.” 

The only answer was an inarticulate groan. 

I went over to the medicine chest. The bed creaked; I 
turned round; Rheya was sitting up, looking at her bleed- 
ing hands with astonishment. 

“Kris,” she sobbed, “I. . . I. . . what happened to me?” 

“You hurt yourself trying to break down the door,” I 
answered curtly. 

My lips were twitching convulsively, and I had to bite 
the lower one to keep it under control. 


94 


Rheya’s glance took in the pieces of door-panel hang- 
ing from the steel frame, then she turned her eyes back 
towards me. She was doing her best to hide her terror, but 
I could see her chin trembling. 

I cut off some squares of gauze, picked up a pot of 
antiseptic powder and returned to the bedside. The glass 
jar slipped through my hands and shattered— but I no 
longer needed it. 

I lifted one of Rheya’s hands. The nails, still surrounded 
by traces of clotted blood, had regrown. There was a pink 
scar in the hollow of her palm, but even this scar was 
healing, disappearing in front of my eyes. 

I sat beside her and stroked her face, trying to smile 
without much success. 

“What did you do that for, Rheya?” 

“I did. . . that?” 

With her eyes, she indicated the door. 

“Yes. . . Don’t you remember?” 

“No. . . that is, I saw you weren’t there, I was very 
frightened, and. . 

“And what?” 

“I looked for you. I thought that perhaps you were in 
the bathroom. . 

Only then did I notice that the sliding door covering the 
entrance to the bathroom had been pushed back. 

“And then?” 

“I ran to the door.” 

“And after that?” 

“I can’t remember. . .Something must have happen- 

ed “What?” 

“I don’t know.” 

“What do you remember?” 

“I was sitting here, on the bed.” 

She swung her legs over the edge of the bed, got up and 
went over to the shattered door. 

“Kris!” 

Walking up behind her, I took her by the shoulders; she 
was shaking. She suddenly turned and whispered: 

“Kris, Kris. . .” 


95 


“Calm yourself!” 

“Kris, if it’s me. . .Kris, am I an epileptic?” 

“What an extraordinary idea, my sweet. The doors in 
this place are rather special. . 

We left the room as the shutter was grinding its way up 
the window; the blue sun was sinking into the ocean. 

I guided Rheya to the small kitchen on the other side of 
the dome. Together we raided the cupboards and the 
refrigerators. I soon noticed that Rheya was scarcely bet- 
ter than I was at cooking or even at opening tins. I de- 
voured the contents of two tins and drank innumerable 
cups of coffee. Rheya also ate, but as children eat when 
they are not hungry and do not want to displease their 
parents; on the other hand, she was not forcing herself, 
simply taking in nourishment automatically, indifferently. 

After our meal, we went into the sick bay, next to the 
radio cabin. I had had an idea. I told Rheya that I wanted 
to give her a medical examination — a straightforward 
check-up — sat her in a mechanical chair, and took a sy- 
ringe and some needles out of the sterilizer. I knew ex- 
actly where each object was to be found; as far as the 
model of the Station’s interior was concerned, the in- 
structors had not overlooked a single detail during my 
training course. Rheya held out her fingers; I took a sam- 
ple of blood. I smeared the blood on to a slide which I laid 
in the suction pipe, introduced it into the vacuum tank and 
bombarded it with silver ions. 

Performing a familiar task had a soothing effect, and I 
felt better. Rheya, leaning back on the cushions in the 
mechanical chair, gazed around at the instruments in the 
sick bay. 

The buzzing of the videophone broke the silence; I 
lifted the receiver: 

“Kelvin.” 

I looked at Rheya; she was still quiet, apparently ex- 
hausted by her recent efforts. 

I heard a sigh of relief. 

“At last.” 

It was Snow. I waited, the receiver pressed close to my 
ear. 


96 


“You’ve had a visit, haven’t you?” 

“Yes.” 

“Are you busy?” 

“Yes.” 

“A little auscultation, eh?” 

“I suppose you’ve got a better suggestion — a game of 
chess maybe?” 

“Don’t be so touchy, Kelvin! Sartorius wants to meet 
you, he wants all three of us to meet.” 

“Very kind of him!” I answered, taken aback. “But. . .” 
I stopped, then went on: “Is he alone?” 

“No. I haven’t explained properly. He wants to have a 
talk with us. We’ll set up a three-way videophone link, but 
with the telescreen lenses covered.” 

“I see. Why didn’t he contact me himself? Is he fright- 
ened of me?” 

“Quite possibly,” grunted Snow. “What do you say?” 

“A conference. In an hour’s time. Will that suit you?” 

“That’s fine.” 

I could see him on the screen— just his face, about the 
size of a fist. For a moment, he looked at me attentively; 
I could hear the crackling of the electric current. Then he 
said, hesitantly: 

“Are you getting on all right?” 

“Not too bad. How about you?” 

“Not so well as you, I dare say. May I. . .?” 

“Do you want to come over here?” 

I glanced at Rheya over my shoulder. She was leaning 
back, legs crossed, her head bent. With a morose air, she 
was fiddling mechanically with the little chrome ball on the 
end of a chain fixed to the arm-rest. 

Snow’s voice erupted: 

“Stop that, do you hear? I told you to stop it!” 

I could see his profile on the screen, but I could no 
longer hear him although his lips were moving — he had 
put his hand over the microphone. 

“No, I can’t come,” he said quickly. “Later perhaps, in 
any case. I’ll contact you in an hour.” 

The screen went blank; I replaced the receiver. 

“Who was it?” asked Rheya indifferently. 


97 


“Snow, a cybernetician. You don’t know him.” 

“Is this going on much longer?” 

“Are you bored?” 

I put the first of the series of slides into the neutron 
microscope, and, one after another, I pressed the differ- 
ent-colored switches; the magnetic fields rumbled hol- 
lowly. 

“There’s not much to do in here, and if my humble 
company isn’t enough for you. . .” 

I was talking distractedly, with long gaps between my 
words. 

I pulled the big black hood round the eye-piece of the 
microscope towards me, and leaned my forehead against 
the resilient foam-rubber viewer. I could hear Rheya’s 
voice, but without taking in what she was saying. Beneath 
my gaze, sharply foreshortened, was a vast desert flooded 
with silvery light, and strewn with rounded boulders — red 
corpuscles— which trembled and wriggled behind a veil of 
mist. I focused the eye-piece and penetrated further into 
the depths of the silvery landscape. Without taking my 
eyes away from the viewer, I turned the view-finder; when 
a boulder, a single corpuscle, detached itself and ap- 
peared at the junction of the cross-hairs, I enlarged the 
image. The lens had apparently picked up a deformed 
erythrocyte, sunken in the centre, whose uneven edges 
projected sharp shadows over the depths of a circular 
crater. The crater, bristling with silver ion deposits, ex- 
tended beyond the microscope’s field of vision. The 
nebulous outlines of threads of albumen, distorted and 
atrophied, appeared in the midst of an opalescent liquid. 
A worm of albumen twisted and turned beneath the cross- 
hairs of the lens. Gradually I increased the enlargement. 
At any moment, I should reach the limit of this explora- 
tion of the depths; the shadow of a molecule occupied the 
whole of the space; then the image became fuzzy. 

There was nothing to be seen. There should have been 
the ferment of a quivering cloud of atoms, but I saw noth- 
ing. A dazzling light filled the screen, which was flawlessly 
clear. I pushed the lever to its utmost. The angry, whirring 
noise grew louder, but the screen remained a blank. An 


98 


alarm signal sounded once, then was repeated; the circuit 
was overloaded. I took a final look at the silvery desert, 
then I cut the current. 

I looked at Rheya. She was in the middle of a yawn which 
she changed adroitly into a smile. 

“Am I in good health?” she asked. 

“Excellent. Couldn’t be better.” 

I continued to look at her and once more I felt as 
though something was crawling along my lower lip. What 
had happened exactly? What was the meaning of it? Was 
this body, frail and weak in appearance but indestructible 
in reality, actually made of nothing? I gave the microscope 
cylinder a blow with my fist. Was the instrument out of 
order? No, I knew that it was working perfectly. I had 
followed the procedure faithfully: first the cells, then the 
albumen, then the molecules; and everything was just as 
I was accustomed to seeing it in the course of examining 
thousands of slides. But the final step, into the heart of the 
matter, had taken me nowhere. 

I put a ligature on Rheya, took some blood from a 
median vein and transferred it to a graduated glass, then 
divided it between several test-tubes and began the ana- 
lyses. These took longer than usual; I was rather out of 
practice. The reactions were normal, every one of them. 

I dropped some congealed acid on to a coral-tinted 
pearl. Smoke. The blood turned grey and a dirty foam 
rose to the surface. Disintegration, decomposition, faster 
and faster! I turned my back to get another test-tube; 
when I looked again at the experiment, I nearly dropped 
the slim glass phial. 

Beneath the skin of dirty foam, a dark coral was rising. 
The blood, destroyed by the acid, was re-creating itself. 
It was crazy, impossible! 

“Kris.” I heard my name called, as though from a great 
distance. “Kris, the videophone!” 

“What? Oh, thanks.” 

The instrument had been buzzing for some time, but I 
had only just noticed it. 

I picked up the receiver: 

“Kelvin.” 


99 


“Snow. We are now all three plugged into the same 
circuit.” 

The high-pitched voice of Sartorius came over the re- 
ceiver: 

“Greetings, Dr. Kelvin!” It was the wary tone of voice, 
full of false assurance, of the lecturer who knows he is on 
tenuous ground. 

“Good-day to you, Dr. Sartorius!” 

I wanted to laugh; but in the circumstances I hardly felt 
I could yield to a mood of hilarity. After all, which of us 
was the laughing stock? In my hand I held a test-tube 
containing some blood. I shook it. The blood coagulated. 
Had I been the victim of an illusion a moment ago? Had 
I, perhaps, been mistaken? 

“I should like to set forth, gentlemen, certain questions 
concerning the. . . the phantoms.” 

I listened to Sartorius, but my mind refused to take in 
his words. I was pondering the coagulated blood and 
shutting out this distracting voice. 

“Let’s call them Phi-creatures,” Snow interjected. 

“Very well, agreed.” 

A vertical line, bisecting the screen and barely percepti- 
ble, showed that I was linked to two channels: on either 
side of this line, I should have seen two images — Snow 
and Sartorius. But the light-rimmed screen remained 
dark. Both my interlocutors had covered the lenses of 
their sets. 

“Each of us has made various experiments.” The nasal 
voice still held the same wariness. There was a pause. 

“I suggest first of all that we pool such knowledge as we 
have acquired so far,” Sartorius went on. “Afterwards, I 
shall venture to communicate to you the conclusions that 
I, personally, have reached. If you would be so good as to 
begin. Dr. Kelvin. . .” 

“Me?” 

All of a sudden, I sensed Rheya watching me. I put my 
hand on the table and rolled the test-tube under the in- 
strument racks. Then I perched myself on a stool which 
I dragged up with my foot. I was about to decline to give 
an opinion when, to my surprise, I heard myself answer: 


100 


“Right. A little talk? I haven’t done much, but I can tell 
you about it. A histological sample. . .certain reactions. 
Micro-reactions. I have the impression that. . .”1 did not 
know how to go on. Suddenly I found my tongue and 
continued: “Everything looks normal, but it’s a camou- 
flage. A cover. In a way, it’s a super-copy, a reproduction 
which is superior to the original. I’ll explain what I mean: 
there exists, in man, an absolute limit— a term to struc- 
tural divisibility — whereas here, the frontiers have been 
pushed back. We are dealing with a sub-atomic struc- 
ture.” 

“Just a minute, just a minute! Kindly be more precise!” 
Sartorius interrupted. 

Snow said nothing. Did I catch an echo of his rapid 
breathing? Rheya was looking at me again. I realized that, 
in my excitement, I had almost shouted the last words. 
Calmer, I settled myself on my uncomfortable perch and 
closed my eyes. How could I be more precise? 

“The atom is the ultimate constituent element of our 
bodies. My guess is that the Phi-beings are constituted of 
units smaller than ordinary atoms, much smaller.” 

“Mesons,” put in Sartorius. He did not sound in the 
least surprised. 

“No, not mesons. . . I would have seen them. The power 
of this instrument here is between a 10th to a 20th of an 
angstrom, isn’t it? But nothing is visible, nothing whatso- 
ever. So it can’t be mesons. More likely neutrinos.” 

“How do you account for that theory? Conglomera- 
tions of neutrinos are unstable. . 

“I don’t know. I’m not a physicist. Perhaps a magnetic 
field could stabilize them. It’s not my province. In any 
event, if my observations are correct, the structure is 
made up of particles at least ten thousand times smaller 
than atoms. Wait a minute, I haven’t finished! If the al- 
buminous molecules and the cells were directly con- 
structed from micro-atoms, they must be proportionally 
even smaller. This applies to the corpuscles, the micro- 
organisms, everything. Now, the dimensions are those of 
atomic structures. Consequently, the albumen, the cell 
and the nucleus of the cell are nothing but camouflage. 


101 


The real structure, which determines the functions of the 
visitor, remains concealed.” 

“Kelvin!” 

Snow had uttered a stifled cry. I stopped, horrified. I 
had said “visitor.” 

Rheya had not overheard. At any rate, she had not un- 
derstood. Her head in her hand, she was staring out of the 
window, her delicate profile etched against the purple 
dawn. 

My distant interlocutors were silent; I could hear their 
breathing. 

“There’s something in what he says,” Snow muttered. 

“Yes,” remarked Sartorius, “but for one fact: Kelvin’s 
hypothetical particles have nothing to do with the struc- 
ture of the ocean. The ocean is composed of atoms.” 

“Perhaps it’s capable of producing neutrinos,” I re- 
plied. 

Suddenly I was bored with all their talk. The conversa- 
tion was pointless, and not even amusing. 

“Kelvin’s hypothesis explains this extraordinary resis- 
tance and the speed of regeneration,” Snow growled. 
“They probably carry their own energy source as well; 
they don’t need food. . .” 

“I believe I have the chair,” Sartorius interrupted. The 
self-designated chairman of the debate was clinging exas- 
peratingly to his role. “I should like to raise the question 
of the motivation behind the appearance of the Phi-crea- 
tures. I put it to you as follows: what are the Phi-creatures? 
They are not autonomous individuals, nor copies of ac- 
tual persons. They are merely projections materializing 
from our brains, based on a given individual.” 

I was struck by the soundness of this description; Sar- 
torius might not be very sympathetic, but he was certainly 
no fool. 

I rejoined the conversation: 

“I think you’re right. Your definition explains why a 
particular per. . .creation appears rather than another. 
The origin of the materialization lies in the most durable 
imprints of memory, those which are especially well- 
defined, but no single imprint can be completely isolated, 
and in the course of the reproduction, fragments of 


102 


related imprints are absorbed. Thus the new arrival 
sometimes reveals a more extensive knowledge than that 
of the individual of whom it is a copy. . 

“Kelvin!” shouted Snow once more. 

It was only Snow who reacted to my lapses; Sartorius 
did not seem to be affected by them. Did this mean that 
Sartorius’s visitor was less perspicacious than Snow’s? 
For a moment, I imagined the scholarly Sartorius cohabit- 
ing with a cretinous dwarf. 

“Indeed, that corresponds with our observations,” Sar- 
torius said. “Now, let us consider the motivation behind 
the apparition! It is natural enough to assume, in the first 
instance, that we are the object of an experiment. When 
I examine this proposition, the experiment seems to me 
badly designed. When we carry out an experiment, we 
profit by the results and, above all, we carefully note the 
defects of our methods. As a result, we introduce modifi- 
cations in our future procedure. But, in the case with 
which we are concerned, not a single modification has 
occurred. The Phi-creatures reappear exactly as they 
were, down to the last detail. . .as vulnerable as before, 
each time we attempt to. . .to rid ourselves of them. . .” 

“Exactly,” I broke in, “a recoil, with no compensating 
mechanism, as Dr. Snow would say. Conclusions?” 

“Simply that the thesis of experimentation is inconsist- 
ent with this. . . this unbelievable bungling. The ocean is 
. . .precise. The dual-level structure of the Phi-creatures 
testifies to this precision. Within the prescribed limits, the 
Phi-creatures behave in the same way as the real. . .the 
. . .er. . . ” 

He could not disentangle himself. 

“The originals,” said Snow, in a loud whisper. 

“Yes, the originals. But when the situation no longer 
corresponds to the normal faculties of. . .er. . .the origi- 
nal, the Phi-creature suffers a sort of ‘disconnection of 
consciousness,’ followed immediately by unusual, non- 
human manifestations. . 

“It’s true,” I said, “and we can amuse ourselves draw- 
ing up a catalogue of the behavior of. . .of these creatures 
— a totally frivolous occupation!” 

“I’m not so sure of that,” protested Sartorius. I sud- 


103 


denly realized why he irritated me so much: he didn’t talk, 
he lectured, as though he were in the chair at the Institute. 
He seemed to be incapable of expressing himself in any 
other way. “Here we come to the question of individual- 
ity,” he went on, “of which, I am quite sure, the ocean has 
not the smallest inkling. I think that the. . . er. . . delicate 
or shocking aspect of our present situation is completely 
beyond its comprehension.” 

“You think its activities are unpremeditated?” 

I was somewhat bewildered by Sartorius’s point of view, 
but on second thought, I realized that it could not be 
dismissed. 

“No, unlike our colleague Snow, I don’t believe there 
is malice, or deliberate cruelty. . .” 

Snow broke in: 

“I’m not suggesting it has human feelings, I’m merely 
trying to find an explanation for these continual reappear- 
ances.” 

With a secret desire to nag poor Sartorius, I said: 

“Perhaps they are plugged into a contrivance which 
goes round and round, endlessly repeating itself, like a 
gramophone record. . .” 

“Gentlemen, I beg you, let us not waste time! I haven’t 
yet finished. In normal circumstances, I would have felt it 
premature to present a report, even a provisional one, on 
the progress of my research; in view of the prevailing 
situation, however, I think I may allow myself to speak out. 
I have the impression— only an impression, mark you — 
that Dr. Kelvin’s hypothesis is not without validity. I am 
alluding to the hypothesis of a neutrino structure. . .Our 
knowledge in this field is purely theoretical. We did not 
know if there was any possibility of stablizing such struc- 
tures. Now a clearly defined solution offers itself to us. A 
means of neutralizing the magnetic field that maintains 
the stability of the structure. . .” 

A few moments previously, I had noticed that the 
screen was flickering with light. Now a split appeared 
from top to bottom of the left-hand side. I saw something 
pink move slowly out of view. Then the lens-cover slipped 
again, disclosing the screen. 


104 


Sartorius gave an anguished cry: 

“Go away! Go away!” 

I saw his hands flapping and struggling, then his fore- 
arms, covered by the wide sleeves of the laboratory gown. 
A bright golden disc shone out for an instant, then every- 
thing went dark. Only then did I realize that this golden 
disc was a straw hat. . . 

I took a deep breath. 

“Snow?” 

An exhausted voice replied: 

“Yes, Kelvin. . . ’’Hearing his voice, I realized that I had 
become quite fond of him, and that I preferred not to 
know who or what his companion was. “That’s enough for 
now, don’t you think?” he said. 

“I agree.” Before he could cut off, I added quickly: 
“Listen, if you can, come and see me, either in the operat- 
ing room or in my cabin.” 

“OK, but I don’t know when.” 

The conference was over. 


105 


The Monsters 


I woke up in the middle of the night to find the light on 
and Rheya crouched at the end of the bed, wrapped in a 
sheet, her shoulders shaking with silent tears. I called her 
name and asked her what was wrong, but she only curled 
up tighter. 

Still half asleep, and barely emerged from the night- 
mare which had been tormenting me only a moment 
before, I pulled myself up to a sitting position and 
shielded my eyes against the glare to look at her. The 
trembling continued, and I stretched out my arms, but 
Rheya pushed me away and hid her face. 

“Rheya. . . ” 

“Don’t talk to me!” 

“Rheya, what’s the matter?” 

I caught a glimpse of her tear-stained face, contorted 
with emotion. The big childish tears streamed down her 
face, glistened in the dimple above her chin and fell onto 
the sheet. 

“You don’t want me.” 

“What are you talking about?” 

“I heard. . . ” 

My jaw tightened: “Heard what? You don’t under- 
stand. . . .” 

“Yes I do. You said I wasn’t Rheya. You wanted me to 


106 


go, and I would, I really would . . . but I can’t. I don’t know 
why. I’ve tried to go, but I couldn’t do it. I’m such a 
coward.” 

“Come on now ” I put my arms round her and held 

her with all my strength. Nothing mattered to me except 
her: everything else was meaningless. I kissed her hands, 
talked, begged, excused myself and made promise after 
promise, saying that she had been having some silly, terri- 
ble dream. Gradually she grew calmer, and at last she 
stopped crying and her eyes glazed, like a woman walking 
in her sleep. She turned her face away from me. 

“No,” she said at last, “be quiet, don’t talk like that. It’s 
no good, you’re not the same person any more.” I started 
to protest, but she went on: “No, you don’t want me. I 
knew it before, but I pretended not to notice. I thought 
perhaps I was imagining everything, but it was true . . . 
you’ve changed. You’re not being honest with me. You 
talk about dreams, but it was you who were dreaming, and 
it was to do with me. You spoke my name as if it repelled 
you. Why? Just tell me why.” 

“Rheya, my little. . . .” 

“I won’t have you talking to me like that, do you hear? 
I won’t let you. I’m not your little anything, I’m not a child. 
I’m ” 

She burst into tears and buried her face in the pillow. 
I got up. The ventilation hummed quietly. It was cold, and 
I pulled a dressing-gown over my shoulders before sitting 
next to her and taking her arm: “Listen to me, I’m going 
to tell you something. I’m going to tell you the truth.” 

She pushed herself upright again. I could see the veins 
throbbing beneath the delicate skin of her neck. My jaw 
tightened once more. The air seemed to be colder still, 
and my head was completely empty. 

“The truth?” she said. “Word of honor?” 

I opened my mouth to speak, but no sound came. 
‘Word of honor’ ... it was our special catch-phrase, our 
old way of making an unconditional promise. Once these 
words had been spoken, neither of us was permitted to lie, 
or even to take refuge behind a half-truth. I remembered 
the period when we used to torture each other in an exag- 


107 


gerated striving for sincerity, convinced that this ingenu- 
ous honesty was the precondition of our relationship. 

Word of honor, Rheya,” I answered gravely, and she 
waited for me to continue. “You have changed too— we all 
change. But that is not what I wanted to say. For some 
reason that neither of us understands, it seems that . . . 
you are forced to stay near me. And that’s fine with me, 
because I can’t leave you either . . .” 

No, Kris. The change is not in you,” Rheya whispered. 
“It’s me. Something is wrong. Perhaps it has to do with 
the accident?” 

She looked at the dark, empty rectangle of the door. 
The previous evening, I had removed the shattered re- 
mains — a new one would have to be fitted. Another 
thought struck me: 

“Have you been managing to sleep?” 

“I don’t know.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“I have dreams ... I don’t know whether they really are 
dreams. Perhaps I’m ill. I lie there and think, and . . 

“What?” 

“I have strange thoughts. I don’t know where they come 
from.” 

It took all my self-control to steady my voice and tell her 
to go on, and I found myself tensing for her answer as if 
for a blow in the face. 

“They are thoughts . . .” She shook her head helplessly. 

. . all around me.” 

“I don’t understand.” 

“I get a feeling as if they were not from inside myself, 
but somewhere further away. I can’t explain it, can’t put 
words to it . . .” 

I broke in almost involuntarily: “It must be some kind 
of dream.” Then, back in control again: “And now, we put 
the light out and we forget our problems until morning. 
Tomorrow we can invent some new ones if you like. OK?” 

She pressed the switch, and darkness fell between us. 
Stretched out on the bed, I felt her warm breathing beside 
me, and put my arms round her. 

“Harder!” she whispered, and then, after a long pause: 


108 


“Kris!” 

“What?” 

“I love you.” 

I almost screamed. 

In the red morning, the sun’s swollen disc was rising 
over the horizon. 

An envelope lay in the doorway, and I tore it open. I 
could hear Rheya humming to herself in the bath, and 
from time to time she looked into the room and I would 
see her face, half hidden by her wet hair. 

I went to the window, and read: 

“Kelvin, things are looking up. Sarlorius has decided that 
it may be possible to use some form of energy to destabilize 
the neutrino structure. He wants to examine some Phi 
plasma in orbit. He suggests that you make a reconnais- 
sance flight and take a certain quantity of plasma in the 
capsule. It's up to you, but let me know what you decide. 

I have no opinion. I feel as if I no longer have anything. 

If I am more in favor of your going, it 's because we would 
at least be making some show of progress. Otherwise, we 
can only envy G. 


Snow. 

P.S. All I ask is for you to stay outside the cabin. You can 
call me on the videophone. ” 

I felt a stir of apprehension as I read the letter, and went 
over it again carefully before tearing it up and throwing 
the pieces into the disposal unit. 

I went through the same terrible charade that I had 
begun the previous day, and made up a story for Rheya’s 
benefit. She did not notice the deception, and when I told 
her that I had to make an inspection and suggested that 
she come with me she was delighted. We stopped at the 
kitchen for breakfast — Rheya ate very little — and then 
made for the library. 

Before venturing on the mission suggested by Sar- 


109 


torius, I wanted to glance through the literature dealing 
with magnetic fields and neutrino structures. I did not yet 
have any clear idea of how I would set about it, but I had 
made up my mind to make an independent check on Sar- 
torius’s activities. Not that I would prevent Snow and 
Sartorius from ‘liberating’ themselves when the annihila- 
tor was completed: I meant to take Rheya out of the Sta- 
tion and wait for the conclusion of the operation in the 
cabin of an aircraft. I set to work with the automatic li- 
brarian. Sometimes it answered my queries by ejecting a 
card with the laconic inscription “Not on file,” sometimes 
it practically submerged me under such a spate of special- 
ist physics textbooks that I hesitated to use its advice. Yet 
I had no desire to leave the big circular chamber. I felt at 
ease in my egg, among the rows of cabinets crammed with 
tape and microfilm. Situated right at the center of the 
Station, the library had no windows: It was the most iso- 
lated area in the great steel shell, and made me feel 
relaxed in spite of finding my researches held up. 

Wandering across the vast room, I stopped at a set of 
shelves as high as the ceiling, and holding about six hun- 
dred volumes — all classics on the history of Solaris, start- 
ing with the nine volumes of Giese’s monumental and 
already relatively obsolescent monograph. Display for its 
own sake was improbable in these surroundings. The col- 
lection was a respectful tribute to the memory of the pio- 
neers. I took down the massive volumes of Giese and sat 
jeafing through them. Rheya had also located some read- 
ing matter. Looking over her shoulder, I saw that she had 
picked one of the many books brought out by the first 
expedition, the Interplanetary Cookery Book, which could 
have been the personal property of Giese himself. She was 
poring over the recipes adapted to the arduous condi- 
tions of interstellar flight. I said nothing, and returned to 
the book resting on my knees. Solaris— Ten Years of Explora- 
tion had appeared as volumes 4-12 of the Solariana collec- 
tion whose most recent additions were numbered in the 
thousands. 

Giese was an unemotional man, but then in the study of 
Solaris emotion is a hindrance to the explorer. Imagina- 


110 


tion and premature theorizing are positive disadvantages 
in approaching a planet where — as has become clear — 
anything is possible. It is almost certain that the unlikely 
descriptions of the ‘plasmatic’ metamorphoses of the 
ocean are faithful accounts of the phenomena observed, 
although these descriptions are unverifiable, since the 
ocean seldom repeats itself. The freakish character and 
gigantic scale of these phenomena go too far outside the 
experience of man to be grasped by anybody observing 
them for the first time, and who would consider analogous 
occurrences as ‘sports of nature,’ accidental manifesta- 
tions of blind forces, if he saw them on a reduced scale, 
say in a mud-volcano on Earth. 

Genius and mediocrity alike are dumbfounded by the 
teeming diversity of the oceanic formations of Solaris; no 
man has ever become genuinely conversant with them. 
Giese was by no means a mediocrity, but nor was he a 
genius. He was a scholarly classifier, the type whose com- 
pulsive application to their work utterly divorces them 
from the pressures of everyday life. Giese devised a plain 
descriptive terminology, supplemented by terms of his 
own invention, and although these were inadequate, and 
sometimes clumsy, it has to be admitted that no semantic 
system is as yet available to illustrate the behavior of the 
ocean. The ‘tree-mountains,’ ‘extensors,’ ‘fungoids,’ ‘mi- 
moids,’ ‘symmetriads’ and ‘asymmetriads,’ ‘vertebrids’ 
and ‘agilus’ are artificial, linguistically awkward terms, but 
they do give some impression of Solaris to anyone who 
has only seen the planet in blurred photographs and in- 
complete films. The fact is that in spite of his cautious 
nature the scrupulous Giese more than once jumped to 
premature conclusions. Even when on their guard, human 
beings inevitably theorize. Giese, who thought himself 
immune to temptation, decided that the ‘extensors’ came 
into the category of basic forms. He compared them to 
accumulations of gigantic waves, similar to the tidal 
movements of our Terran oceans. In the first edition of 
his work, we find them originally named as ‘tides.’ This 
geocentrism might be considered amusing if it did not 
underline the dilemma in which he found himself. 


Ill 


As soon as the question of comparisons with Earth 
arises, it must be understood that the ‘extensors’ are for- 
mations that dwarf the Grand Canyon, that they are pro- 
duced in a substance which externally resembles a yeasty 
colloid (during this fantastic ‘fermentation,’ the yeast sets 
into festoons of starched open-work lace; some experts 
refer to ‘ossified tumors’), and that deeper down the sub- 
stance becomes increasingly resistant, like a tensed mus- 
cle which fifty feet below the surface is as hard as rock but 
retains its flexibility. The ‘extensor’ appears to be an inde- 
pendent creation, stretching for miles between membra- 
nous walls swollen with ‘ossified growths,’ like some 
colossal python which after swallowing a mountain is 
sluggishly digesting the meal, while a slow shudder occa- 
sionally ripples along its creeping body. The ‘extensor’ 
only looks like a lethargic reptile from overhead. At close 
quarters, when the two ‘canyon walls’ loom hundreds of 
yards above the exploring aircraft, it can be seen that this 
inflated cylinder, reaching from one side of the horizon to 
the other, is bewilderingly alive with movement. First you 
notice the continual rotating motion of a greyish-green, 
oily sludge which reflects blinding sunlight, but skimming 
just above the ‘back of the python’ (the ‘ravine’ sheltering 
the extensor now resembles the sides of a geological 
fault), you realize that the motion is in fact far more com- 
plex, and consists of concentric fluctuations traversed by 
darker currents. Occasionally this mantle turns into a 
shining crust that reflects sky and clouds and then is rid- 
dled by explosive eruptions of the internal gases and 
fluids. The observer slowly realizes that he is looking at 
the guiding forces that are thrusting outward and upward 
the two gradually crystallizing gelatinous walls. Science 
does not accept the obvious without further proof, how- 
ever, and virulent controversies have reverberated down 
the years on the key question of the exact sequence of 
events in the interior of the ‘extensors’ that furrow the 
vast living ocean in their millions. 

Various organic functions have been ascribed to the 
‘extensors.’ Some experts have argued that their purpose 
is the transformation of matter; others suggested respira- 


112 


tory processes; still others claimed that they conveyed 
alimentary materials. An infinite variety of hypotheses 
now moulder in library basements, eliminated by ingeni- 
ous, sometimes dangerous experiments. Today, the 
scientists will go no further than to refer to the ‘extensors’ 
as relatively simple, stable formations whose duration is 
measurable in weeks — an exceptional characteristic 
among the recorded phenomena of the planet. 

The ‘mimoid’ formations are considerably more com- 
plex and bizarre, and elicit a more vehement response 
from the observer, an instinctive response, I mean. It can 
be stated without exaggeration that Giese fell in love with 
the ‘mimoids’ and was soon devoting all his time to them. 
For the rest of his life, he studied and described them and 
brought all his ingenuity to bear on defining their nature. 
The name he gave them indicates their most astonishing 
characteristic, the imitation of objects, near or far, exter- 
nal to the ocean itself. 

Concealed at first beneath the ocean surface, a large 
flattened disc appears, ragged, with a tar-like coating. 
After a few hours, it begins to separate into flat sheets 
which rise slowly. The observer now becomes a spectator 
at what looks like a fight to the death, as massed ranks of 
waves converge from all directions like contorted, fleshy 
mouths which snap greedily around the tattered, flutter- 
ing leaf, then plunge into the depths. As each ring of 
waves breaks and sinks, the fall of this mass of hundreds 
of thousands of tons is accompanied for an instant by a 
viscous rumbling, an immense thunderclap. The tarry leaf 
is overwhelmed, battered and torn apart; with every fresh 
assault, circular fragments scatter and drift like feebly 
fluttering wings below the ocean surface. They bunch into 
pear-shaped clusters or long strings, merge and rise 
again, and drag with them an undertow of coagulated 
shreds of the base of the primal disc. The encircling waves 
continue to break around the steadily expanding crater. 
This phenomenon may persist for a day or linger on for 
a month, and sometimes there are no further develop- 
ments. The conscientious Giese dubbed this first varia- 
tion a ‘stillbirth,’ convinced that each of these upheavals 


113 


aspired towards an ultimate condition, the ‘major mi- 
moid,’ like a polyp colony (only covering an area greater 
than a town) of pale outcroppings with the faculty of imi- 
tating foreign bodies. Uyvens, on the other hand, saw this 
final stage as constituting a degeneration or necrosis: 
according to him, the appearance of the ‘copies’ corre- 
sponded to a localized dissipation of the life energies of 
the ocean, which was no longer in control of the original 
forms it created. 

Giese would not abandon his account of the various 
phases of the process as a sustained progression towards 
perfection, with a conviction which is particularly surpris- 
ing coming from a man of such a moderate, cautious turn 
of mind in advancing the most trivial hypothesis on the 
other creations of the ocean. Normally he had all the bold- 
ness of an ant crawling up a glacier. 

Viewed from above, the mimoid resembles a town, an 
illusion produced by our compulsion to superimpose 
analogies with what we know. When the sky is clear, a 
shimmering heat-haze covers the pliant structures of the 
clustered polyps surmounted by membranous palisades. 
The first cloud passing overhead wakens the mimoid. All 
the outcrops suddenly sprout new shoots, then the mass 
of polyps ejects a thick tegument which dilates, puffs out, 
changes color and in the space of a few minutes has pro- 
duced an astonishing imitation of the volutes of a cloud. 
The enormous ‘object’ casts a reddish shadow over the 
mimoid, whose peaks ripple and bend together, always in 
the opposite direction to the movement of the real cloud. 
I imagine that Giese would have been ready to give his 
right hand to discover what made the mimoids behave in 
this way, but these ‘isolated’ productions are nothing in 
comparison to the frantic activity the mimoid displays 
when ‘stimulated’ by objects of human origin. 

The reproduction process embraces every object in- 
side a radius of eight or nine miles. Usually the facsimile 
is an enlargement of the original, whose forms are some- 
times only roughly copied. The reproduction of ma- 
chines, in particular, elicits simplifications that might be 
considered grotesque — practically caricatures. The copy 
is always modelled in the same colorless tegument, which 


114 


hovers above the outcrops, linked to its base by flimsy 
umbilical cords; it slides, creeps, curls back on itself, 
shrinks or swells and finally assumes the most com- 
plicated forms. An aircraft, a net or a pole are all repro- 
duced at the same speed. The mimoid is not stimulated 
by human beings themselves, and in fact it does not react 
to any living matter, and has never copied, for example, 
the plants imported for experimental purposes. On the 
other hand, it will readily reproduce a puppet or a doll, a 
carving of a dog, or a tree sculpted in any material. 

The observer must bear in mind that the ‘obedience’ of 
the mimoid does not constitute evidence of cooperation, 
since it is not consistent. The most highly-evolved mi- 
moid has its off-days, when it ‘lives’ in slow-motion, or its 
pulsation weakens. (This pulsation is invisible to the 
naked eye, and was only discovered after close examina- 
tion of rapid-motion film of the mimoid, which revealed 
that each ‘beat’ took two hours.) 

During these ‘off-days,’ it is easy to explore the mimoid, 
especially if it is old, for the base anchored in the ocean, 
like the protuberances growing out of it, is relatively 
solid, and provides a firm footing for a man. It is equally 
possible to remain inside the mimoid during periods of 
activity, except that visibility is close to nil because of the 
whitish colloidal dust continually emitted through tears in 
the tegument above. In any case, at close range it is im- 
possible to distinguish what forms the tegument is as- 
suming, on account of their vast size — the smallest ‘copy’ 
is the size of a mountain. In addition, a thick layer of 
colloidal snow quickly covers the base of the mimoid: this 
spongy carpet takes several hours to solidify (the ‘frozen’ 
crust will take the weight of a man, though its composition 
is much lighter than pumice stone). The problem is that 
without special equipment there is a risk of being lost in 
the maze of tangled structures and crevasses, sometimes 
reminiscent of jumbled colonnades, sometimes of pe- 
trified geysers. Even in daylight it is easy to lose one’s 
direction, for the sun’s rays cannot pierce the white ceil- 
ing ejected into the atmosphere by the ‘imitative explo- 
sions.’ 

On gala days (for the scientist as well as for the mi- 


115 


moid), an unforgettable spectacle develops as the mimoid 
goes into hyperproduction and performs wild flights of 
fancy. It plays variations on the theme of a given object 
and embroiders ‘formal extensions’ that amuse it for 
hours on end, to the delight of the non-figurative artist 
and the despair of the scientist, who is at a loss to grasp 
any common theme in the performance. The mimoid can 
produce ‘primitive’ simplifications, but is just as likely to 
indulge in ‘baroque’ deviations, paroxysms of extrava- 
gant brilliance. Old mimoids tend to manufacture ex- 
tremely comic forms. Looking at the photographs, I have 
never been moved to laughter; the riddle they set is too 
disquieting to be funny. 

During the early years of exploration, the scientists lit- 
erally threw themselves upon the mimoids, which were 
spoken of as open windows on the ocean and the best 
opportunity to establish the hoped-for contact between 
the two civilizations. They were soon forced to admit that 
there was not the slightest prospect of communication, 
and that the entire process began and ended with the 
reproduction of forms. The mimoids were a dead end. 

Giving way to the temptations of a latent anthropomor- 
phism or zoomorphism, there were many schools of 
thought which saw various other oceanic formations as 
‘sensory organs,’ even as ‘limbs,’ which was how experts 
like Maartens and Ekkonai classified Giese’s ‘vertebrids’ 
and ‘agilus’ for a time. Anyone who is rash enough to see 
protuberances that reach as far as two miles into the at- 
mosphere as limbs, might just as well claim that earth- 
quakes are the gymnastics of the Earth’s crust! 

Three hundred chapters of Giese catalogue the stand- 
ard formations which occur on the surface of the living 
ocean and which can be seen in dozens, even hundreds, 
in the course of any day. The symmetriads — to continue 
using the terminology and definitions of the Giese school 
— are the least ‘human’ formations, which is to say that 
they bear no resemblance whatsoever to anything on 
Earth. By the time the symmetriads were being investi- 
gated, it was already clear that the ocean was not aggres- 
sive, and that its plasmatic eddies would not swallow any 


116 


but the most foolhardy explorer (of course I am not in- 
cluding accidents resulting from mechanical failures). It 
is possible to fly in complete safety from one part to an- 
other of the cylindrical body of an extensor, or of the 
vertebrids, Jacob’s ladders oscillating among the clouds: 
the plasma retreats at the speed of sound in the planet’s 
atmosphere to make way for any foreign body. Deep fun- 
nels will open even beneath the surface of the ocean (at a 
prodigious expenditure of energy, calculated by Scriabin 
at around 10 19 ergs). Nevertheless, the first venture into 
the interior of a symmetriad was undertaken with the ut- 
most caution and discipline, and involved a host of what 
turned out to be unnecessary safety measures. Every 
schoolboy on Earth knows the names of these pioneers. 

It is not their nightmare appearance that makes the 
gigantic symmetriad formations dangerous, but the total 
instability and capriciousness of their structure, in which 
even the laws of physics do not hold. The theory that the 
living ocean is endowed with intelligence has found its 
firmest adherents among those scientists who have ven- 
tured into their unpredictable depths. 

The birth of a symmetriad comes like a sudden erup- 
tion. About an hour beforehand, an area of tens of square 
miles of ocean vitrifies and begins to shine. It remains 
fluid, and there is no alteration in the rhythm of the waves. 
Occasionally the phenomenon of vitrification occurs in 
the neighbourhood of the funnel left by an agilus. The 
gleaming sheath of the ocean heaves upwards to form a 
vast ball that reflects sky, sun, clouds and the entire hori- 
zon in a medley of changing, variegated images. Diff- 
racted light creates a kaleidoscopic play of color. 

The effects of light on a symmetriad are especially strik- 
ing during the blue day and the red sunset. The planet 
appears to be giving birth to a twin that increases in 
volume from one moment to the next. The immense flam- 
ing globe has scarcely reached its maximum expansion 
above the ocean when it bursts at the summit and cracks 
vertically. It is not breaking up; this is the second phase, 
which goes under the clumsy name of the ‘floral calyx 
phase’ and lasts only a few seconds. The membranous 


117 


arches soaring into the sky now fold inwards and merge 
to produce a thick-set trunk enclosing a scene of teeming 
activity. At the center of the trunk, which was explored for 
the first time by the seventy-man Hamalei expedition, a 
process of polycrystallization on a giant scale erects an 
axis commonly referred to as the ‘backbone,’ a term 
which I consider ill-chosen. The mind-bending architec- 
ture of this central pillar is held in place by vertical shafts 
of a gelatinous, almost liquid consistency, constantly 
gushing upwards out of wide crevasses. Meanwhile, the 
entire trunk is surrounded by a belt of snowy foam, seeth- 
ing with great bubbles of gas, and the whole process is 
accompanied by a perpetual dull roar of sound. From the 
center towards the periphery, powerful buttresses spin 
out and are coated with streams of ductile matter rising 
out of the ocean depths. Simultaneously the gelatinous 
geysers are converted into mobile columns that proceed 
to extrude tendrils that reach out in clusters towards 
points rigorously predetermined by the over-all dynamics 
of the entire structure: they call to mind the gills of an 
embryo, except that they are revolving at fantastic speed 
and ooze trickles of pinkish ‘blood’ and a dark green 
secretion. 

The symmetriad now begins to display its most exotic 
characteristic — the property of ‘illustrating,’ sometimes 
contradicting, various laws of physics. (Bear in mind that 
no two symmetriads are alike, and that the geometry of 
each one is a unique ‘invention’ of the living ocean.) The 
interior of the symmetriad becomes a factory for the pro- 
duction of ‘monumental machines,’ as these constructs 
are sometimes called, although they resemble no machine 
which it is within the power of mankind to build: the desig- 
nation is applied because all this activity has finite ends, 
and is therefore in some sense ‘mechanical.’ 

When the geysers of oceanic matter have solidified into 
pillars or into three-dimensional networks of galleries 
and passages, and the ‘membranes’ are set into an inextri- 
cable pattern of storeys, panels and vaults, the symmet- 
riad justifies its name, for the entire structure is divided 


118 


into two segments each mirroring the other to the most 
infinitesimal detail. 

After twenty or thirty minutes, when the axis may have 
tilted as much as eight to ten degrees from the horizontal, 
the giant begins slowly to subside. (Symmetriads vary in 
size, but as the base begins to submerge even the smallest 
reach a height of half a mile, and are visible from miles 
away.) At last, the structure stabilizes itself, and the partly 
submerged symmetriad ceases its activity. It is now possi- 
ble to explore it in complete safety by making an entry 
near the summit, through one of the many syphons which 
emerge from the dome. The completed symmetriad 
represents a spatial analogue of some transcendental 
equation. 

It is a commonplace that any equation can be expressed 
in the figurative language of non-Euclidean geometry and 
represented in three dimensions. This interpretation re- 
lates the symmetriad to Lobachevsky’s cones and Rie- 
mann’s negative curves, although its unimaginable 
complexity makes the relationship highly tenuous. The 
eventual form occupies an area of several cubic miles and 
extends far beyond our whole system of mathematics. In 
addition, this extension is four-dimensional, for the fun- 
damental terms of the equations use a temporal symbol- 
ism expressed in the internal changes over a given 
period. 

It would be only natural, clearly, to suppose that the 
symmetriad is a ‘computer’ of the living ocean, perform- 
ing calculations for a purpose that we are not able to 
grasp. This was Fremont’s theory, now generally dis- 
counted. The hypothesis was a tempting one, but it 
proved impossible to sustain the concept that the living 
ocean examined problems of matter, the cosmos and 
existence through the medium of titanic eruptions, in 
which every particle had an indispensable function as a 
controlled element in an analytical system of infinite 
purity. In fact, numerous phenomena contradict this 
over-simplified (some say childishly naive) concept. 

Any number of attempts have been made to transpose 


119 


and ‘illustrate’ the symmetriad, and Averian’s demonstra- 
tion was particularly well received. Let us imagine, he 
said, an edifice dating from the great days of Babylon, but 
built of some living, sensitive substance with the capacity 
to evolve: the architectonics of this edifice passes through 
a series of phases, and we see it adopt the forms of a 
Greek, then of a Roman building. The columns sprout like 
branches and become narrower, the roof grows lighter, 
rises, curves, the arch describes an abrupt parabola then 
breaks down into an arrow shape: the Gothic is born, 
comes to maturity and gives way in time to new forms. 
Austerity of line gives way to a riot of exploding lines and 
shapes, and the Baroque runs wild. If the progression 
continues — and the successive mutations are to be seen as 
stages in the life of an evolving organism — we finally ar- 
rive at the architecture of the space age, and perhaps too 
at some understanding of the symmetriad. 

Unfortunately, no matter how this demonstration may 
be expanded and improved (there have been attempts to 
visualize it with the aid of models and films), the compari- 
son remains superficial. It is evasive and illusory, and 
side-steps the central fact that the symmetriad is quite 
unlike anything Earth has ever produced. 

The human mind is only capable of absorbing a few 
things at a time. We see what is taking place in front of us 
in the here and now, and cannot envisage simultaneously 
a succession of processes, no matter how integrated and 
complementary. Our faculties of perception are conse- 
quently limited even as regards fairly simple phenomena. 
The fate of a single man can be rich with significance, that 
of a few hundred less so, but the history of thousands and 
millions of men does not mean anything at all, in any 
adequate sense of the word. The symmetriad is a million 
— a billion, rather — raised to the power of N: it is incom- 
prehensible. We pass through vast halls, each with a ca- 
pacity of ten Kronecker units, and creep like so many ants 
clinging to the folds of breathing vaults and craning to 
watch the flight of soaring girders, opalescent in the glare 
of searchlights, and elastic domes which criss-cross and 
balance each other unerringly, the perfection of a mo- 

120 


ment, since everything here passes and fades. The es- 
sence of this architecture is movement synchronized to- 
wards a precise objective. We observe a fraction of the 
process, like hearing the vibration of a single string in an 
orchestra of supergiants. We know, but cannot grasp, that 
above and below, beyond the limits of perception or 
imagination, thousands and millions of simultaneous 
transformations are at work, interlinked like a musical 
score by mathematical counterpoint. It has been de- 
scribed as a symphony in geometry, but we lack the ears 
to hear it. 

Only a long-distance view would reveal the entire pro- 
cess, but the outer covering of the symmetriad conceals 
the colossal inner matrix where creation is unceasing, the 
created becomes the creator, and absolutely identical 
‘twins’ are born at opposite poles, separated by towering 
structures and miles of distance. The symphony creates 
itself, and writes its own conclusion, which is terrible to 
watch. Every observer feels like a spectator at a tragedy or 
a public massacre, when after two or three hours — never 
longer— the living ocean stages its assault. The polished 
surface of the ocean swirls and crumples, the desiccated 
foam liquefies again, begins to seethe, and legions of 
waves pour inwards from every point of the horizon, their 
gaping mouths far more massive than the greedy lips that 
surround the embryonic mimoid. The submerged base of 
the symmetriad is compressed, and the colossus rises as 
if on the point of being shot out of the planet’s gravita- 
tional pull. The upper layers of the ocean redouble their 
activity, and the waves surge higher and higher to lick 
against the sides of the symmetriad. They envelop it, 
harden and plug the orifices, but their attack is nothing 
compared to the scene in the interior. First the process of 
creation freezes momentarily; then there is ‘panic.’ The 
smooth interpenetration of moving forms and the har- 
monious play of planes and lines accelerates, and the im- 
pression is inescapable that the symmetriad is hurrying to 
complete some task in the face of danger. The awe in- 
spired by the metamorphosis and dynamics of the sym- 
metriad intensifies as the proud sweep of the domes 


121 


falters, vaults sag and droop, and ‘wrong notes’ — incom- 
plete, mangled forms — make their appearance. A power- 
ful moaning roar issues from the invisible depths like a 
sigh of agony, reverberates through the narrow funnels 
and booms through the collapsing domes. In spite of the 
growing destructive violence of these convulsions, the 
spectator is rooted to the spot. Only the force of the 
hurricane streaming out of the depths and howling 
through the thousands of galleries keeps the great struc- 
ture erect. Soon it subsides and starts to disintegrate. 
There are final flutterings, contortions, and blind, ran- 
dom spasms. Gnawed and undermined, the giant sinks 
slowly and disappears, and the space where it stood is 
covered with whirlpools of foam. 

So what does all this mean? 

I remembered an incident dating from my spell as as- 
sistant to Gibarian. A group of schoolchildren visiting the 
Solarist Institute in Aden were making their way through 
the main hall of the library and looking at the racks of 
microfilm that occupied the entire left-hand side of the 
hall. The guide explained that among other phenomena 
immortalized by the image, these contained fragmentary 
glimpses of symmetriads long since vanished— -not single 
shots, but whole reels, more than ninety thousand of 
them! 

One plump schoolgirl (she looked about fifteen, peer- 
ing inquisitively over her spectacles) abruptly asked: 
“And what is it for?” 

In the ensuing embarrassed silence, the school mis- 
tress was content to dart a reproving look at her wayward 
pupil. Among the Solarists whose job was to act as guides 
(I was one of them), no one would produce an answer. 
Each symmetriad is unique, and the developments in its 
heart are, generally speaking, unpredictable. Sometimes 
there is no sound. Sometimes the index of refraction in- 
creases or diminishes. Sometimes, rhythmic pulsations 
are accompanied by local changes in gravitation, as if the 
heart of the symmetriad were beating by gravitating. 
Sometimes the compasses of the observers spin wildly, 
and ionized layers spring up and disappear. The cata- 


122 


logue could go on indefinitely. In any case, even if we did 
ever succeed in solving the riddle of the symmetriads, we 
would still have to contend with the asymmetriadsl 

The asymmetriads are born in the same manner as the 
symmetriads but finish differently, and nothing can be 
seen of their internal processes except tremors, vibra- 
tions and flickering. We do know, however, that the in- 
terior houses bewildering operations performed at a 
speed that defies the laws of physics and which are dubbed 
‘giant quantic phenomena.’ The mathematical analogy 
with certain three-dimensional models of the atom is so 
unstable and transitory that some commentators dismiss 
the resemblance as of secondary importance, if not purely 
accidental. The asymmetriads have a very short life-span 
of fifteen to twenty minutes, and their death is even more 
appalling than that of the symmetriads: with the howling 
gale that screams through its fabric, a thick fluid gushes 
out, gurgles hideously, and submerges everything 
beneath a foul, bubbling foam. Then an explosion, coinci- 
ding with a muddy eruption, hurls up a spout of debris 
which rains slowly down into the seething ocean. This 
debris is sometimes found scores of miles from the focus 
of the explosion, dried up, yellow and flattened, like flakes 
of cartilage. 

Some other creations of the ocean, which are much 
more rare and of very variable duration, part company 
with the parent body entirely. The first traces of these 
‘independents’ were identified — wrongly, it was later 
proved — as the remains of creatures inhabiting the ocean 
deeps. The free-ranging forms are often reminiscent of 
many-winged birds, darting away from the moving trunks 
of the agilus, but the preconceptions of Earth offer no 
assistance in unravelling the mysteries of Solaris. 
Strange, seal-like bodies appear now and then on the 
rocky outcrop of an island, sprawling in the sun or drag- 
ging themselves lazily back to merge with the ocean. 

There was no escaping the impressions that grew out 
of man’s experience on Earth. The prospects of Contact 
receded. 

Explorers travelled hundreds of miles in the depths of 


123 


symmetriads, and installed measuring instruments and 
remote-control cameras. Artificial satellites captured the 
birth of mimoids and extensors, and faithfully repro- 
duced their images of growth and destruction. The librar- 
ies overflowed, the archives grew, and the price paid for 
all this documentation was often very heavy. One notori- 
ous disaster cost one hundred and six people their lives, 
among them Giese himself: while studying what was un- 
doubtedly a symmetriad, the expedition was suddenly de- 
stroyed by a process peculiar to the asymmetriads. In two 
seconds, an eruption of glutinous mud swallowed up sev- 
enty-nine men and all their equipment. Another twenty- 
seven observers surveying the area from aircraft and 
helicopters were also caught in the eruption. 

Following the Eruption of the Hundred and Six, and for 
the first time in Solarist studies, there were petitions de- 
manding a thermo-nuclear attack on the ocean. Such a 
response would have been more cruelty than revenge, 
since it would have meant destroying what we did not 
understand. Tsanken’s ultimatum, which was never offi- 
cially acknowledged, probably influenced the negative 
outcome of the vote. He was in command of Giese’s re- 
serve team, and had survived owing to a transmission 
error that took him off his course, to arrive in the disaster 
area a few minutes after the explosion, when the black 
mushroom cloud was still visible. Informed of the pro- 
posal for a nuclear strike, he threatened to blow up the 
Station, together with the nineteen survivors sheltering 
inside it. 

Today, there are only three of us in the Station. Its 
construction was controlled by satellites, and was a tech- 
nical feat on which the human race has a right to pride 
itself, even if the ocean builds far more impressive struc- 
tures in the space of a few seconds. The Station is a disc 
of one hundred yards radius, and contains four decks at 
the center and two at the circumference. It is maintained 
at a height of from five to fifteen hundred yards above the 
ocean by gravitors programmed to compensate for the 
ocean’s owm field of attraction. In addition to all the ma- 
chines available to ordinary Stations and the large artifi- 


124 


cial satellites that orbit other planets, the Solaris Station 
is equipped with specialized radar apparatus sensitive to 
the smallest fluctuations of the ocean surface, which trips 
auxiliary power-circuits capable of thrusting the steel disc 
into the stratosphere at the first indication of new plas- 
matic upheavals. 

But today, in spite of the presence of our faithful 
‘visitors,’ the Station was strangely deserted. Ever since 
the robots had been locked away in the lower-deck store- 
rooms— for a reason I had still not discovered— it had 
been possible to walk around without meeting a single 
member of the crew of our ghost ship. 

As I replaced the ninth volume of Giese on the shelf, the 
plastic-coated steel floor seemed to shudder under my 
feet. I stood still, but the vibration had stopped. The li- 
brary was completely isolated from the other rooms, and 
the only possible source of vibration must be a shuttle 
leaving the Station. This thought jerked me back to real- 
ity. I had not yet decided to accept Sartorius’s suggestion 
and leave the Station. By feigning approval of his plan, I 
had been more or less postponing the outbreak of hostili- 
ties, for I was determined to save Rheya. All the same, 
Sartorius might have some chance of success. He cer- 
tainly had the advantage of being a qualified physicist, 
while I was in the ironic position of having to count on the 
superiority of the ocean. I pored over microfilm texts for 
an hour, and made myself wrestle with the unfamiliar lan- 
guage of neutrino physics. The undertaking seemed 
hopeless at first: there were no less than five current theo- 
ries dealing with neutrino fields, an obvious indication 
that none was definitive. Eventually I struck promising 
ground, and was busily copying down equations when 
there was a knock at the door. I got up quickly and opened 
it a few inches, to see Snow’s perspiring face, and behind 
him an empty corridor. 

“Yes, it’s me.” His voice was hoarse, and there were 
dark pouches under the bloodshot eyes. He wore an anti- 
radiation apron of shiny rubber, and the same worn old 
trousers held up by elastic braces. 

Snow’s gaze flickered round the circular chamber and 


125 


alighted on Rheya where she stood by an armchair at the 
other end. Then it returned to me, and I lowered my 
eyelids imperceptibly. He nodded, and I spoke casually: 

‘‘Rheya, come and meet Dr. Snow . . . Snow — my wife.” 

“I . . . I’m just a minor member of the crew. Don’t get 
about much. . . ” He faltered, but managed to blurt out: 

That s why I haven’t had the pleasure of meeting you 
before. . . ” 

Rheya smiled and held out her hand, which he shook in 
some surprise. He blinked several times and stood look- 
ing at her, tongue-tied, until I took him by the arm. 

Excuse me, he said to Rheya. “I wanted a word with 
you, Kelvin. . . ” 

“Of course.” (My composure was an ugly charade, but 
what else could I do?) “Take no notice of us, Rheya. We’ll 
be talking shop. . . ” 

I guided Snow over to the chairs on the far side of the 
room, and Rheya sat in the armchair I had occupied ear- 
lier, swivelling it so that she could glance up at us from 
her book. I lowered my voice: 

“Any news?” 

“I’m divorced,” he whispered. If anybody had quoted 
this to me as the opening of a conversation a few days 
before, I would have burst out laughing, but the Station 
had blunted my sense of humor. “It feels like years since 
yesterday morning,” he went on. “And you?” 

“Nothing.” I was at a loss for words. I liked Snow, but 
I distrusted him, or rather I distrusted the purpose of his 
visit. 

“Nothing? Surely ...” 

“What?” I pretended not to understand. 

Eyes half shut, he leaned so close to me that I could feel 
his breath on my face: 

“This business has all of us confused, Kelvin. I can’t 
make contact with Sartorius. All I know is what I wrote to 
you, which is what he told me after our little confer- 
ence. . . ” 

“Has he disconnected his videophone?” 

“No, there’s been a short-circuit at his end. He could 
have done it on purpose, but there’s also. . . ” He clenched 


126 


his fist and mimed somebody aiming a punch, curling his 
lips in an unpleasant grin. “Kelvin, I came here to. . . What 
do you intend doing?” 

“You want my answer to your letter. All right, I’ll go on 
the trip, there’s no reason for me to refuse. I’ve only been 
getting ready. . . ” 

“No,” he interrupted. “It isn’t that.” 

“What then? Go on.” 

“Sartorius thinks he may be on the right track,” Snow 
muttered. His eyes never left me, and I had to stay still and 
try to look casual. “It all started with that X-ray experi- 
ment that he and Gibarian arranged, you remember. That 
could have produced some alteration. . . ” 

“What kind of alteration?” 

“They beamed the rays directly into the ocean. The 
intensity was only modulated according to a pre-set pro- 
gram.” 

“I know. It’s already been done by Nilin and a lot of 
others.” 

“Yes, but the others worked on low power. This time 
they used everything we had.” 

“That could lead to trouble. . . violating the four-power 
convention, and the United Nations. . . ” 

“Come on, Kelvin, you know as well as I do that it 
doesn’t matter now. Gibarian is dead.” 

“So Sartorius makes him the scapegoat?” 

“I don’t know. We haven’t talked about that. Sartorius 
is intrigued by the visiting hours. They only come as we 
wake up, which suggests that the ocean is especially inter- 
ested in our sleeping hours, and that that is when it locates 
its patterns. Sartorius wants to send our waking selves — 
our conscious thoughts. You see?” 

“By mail?” 

“Keep the jokes to yourself. The idea is to modulate the 
X-rays by hooking in an electro-encephalograph taken 
from one of us.” 

“Ah!” Light was beginning to dawn. “And that one of 
us is me?” 

“Yes, Sartorius had you in mind.” 

“Tell him I’m flattered.” 


127 


“Will you do it?” 

I hesitated. Snow darted a look at Rheya, who seemed 
absorbed in her book. I felt my face turn pale. 

“Well?” 

“The idea of using X-rays to preach sermons on the 
greatness of mankind seems absolutely ridiculous to me. 
Don’t you think so?” 

“You mean it?” 

“Yes.” 

“Right,” he said, smiling as if I had fallen in with some 
idea of his own, “then you’re opposed to the plan?” 

His expression told me that he had somehow been a 
step ahead of me all the time. 

“Okay,” he went on. “There is a second plan — to con- 
struct a Roche apparatus.” 

“An annihilator?” 

“Yes. Sartorius has already made the preliminary calcu- 
lations. It is feasible, and it won’t even require any great 
expenditure of energy. The apparatus will generate a 
negative field twenty-four hours a day, and for an unlim- 
ited period.” 

“And its effect?” 

“Simple. It will be a negative neutrino field. Ordinary 
matter will not be affected at all. Only the. . . neutrino 
structures will be destroyed. You see?” 

Snow gave me a satisfied grin. I stood stock-still and 
gaping, so that he stopped smiling, looked at me with a 
frown, and waited a moment before speaking: 

“We abandon the first plan then, the ‘Brainwave’ plan? 
Sartorius is working on the other one right now. We’ll call 
it ‘Project Liberation.’ ” 

I had to make a quick decision. Snow was no physicist, 
and Sartorius’s videophone was disconnected or 
smashed. I took the chance: 

“I’d rather call the second idea ‘Operation Slaughter- 
house.’ ” 

“And you ought to know! Don’t tell me you haven’t had 
so . me . P ract i ce lately. Only there’ll be a radical difference 
this time — no more visitors, no more Phi creatures — they 


128 


will disintegrate as soon as they appear.” 

I nodded, and managed what I hoped was a convincing 
smile: 

“You haven’t got the point. Morality is one thing, but 
self-preservation. . . I just don’t want to get us all killed. 
Snow.” 

He stared back at me suspiciously, as I showed him my 
scribbled equations: 

“I’ve been working along the same lines. Don’t look so 
surprised. The neutrino theory was my idea in the first 
place, remember? Look. Negative fields can be generated 
all right. And ordinary matter is unaffected. But what hap- 
pens to the energy that maintains the neutrino structure 
when it disintegrates? There must be a considerable re- 
lease of that energy. Assuming a kilogram of ordinary 
matter represents 10 8 ergs, for a Phi creation we get 5 7 
multiplied by 10 8 . That means the equivalent of a small 
atomic bomb exploding inside the Station.” 

“You mean to tell me Sartorius won’t have been over 
all this?” 

It was my turn to grin maliciously: 

“Not necessarily. Sartorius follows the Frazer-Cajolla 
school. Their theories would indicate that the energy po- 
tential would be given off in the form of light — powerful, 
yes, but not destructive. But that isn’t the only theory of 
neutrino fields. According to Cayatte, and Avalov, and 
Sion, the radiation-spectrum would be much broader. At 
its maximum, there would be a strong burst of gamma 
radiation. Sartorius has faith in his tutors. I don’t say we 
can’t respect that, but there are other tutors, and other 
theories. And another thing, Snow,” — I could see him 
beginning to waver — “we have to bear in mind the ocean 
itself! It is bound to have used the optimum means of 
designing its creations. It seems to me that we can’t afford 
to back Sartorius against the ocean as well as the other 
theories.” 

“Give me that paper, Kelvin.” 

I passed it to him, and he poured over my equations. 

“What’s this?” He pointed to a line of calculations. 


129 


“That? The transformation tensor of the magnetic 
field.” 

“Give it here.” 

“Why?” (I already knew his reply.) 

“I’ll have to show Sartorius.” 

“If you say so,” I shrugged. “You’re welcome to it, 
naturally, provided you realize that these theories have 
never been tested experimentally: neutrino structures 
have been abstractions until now. Sartorius is relying on 
Frazier, and I’ve followed Sion’s theory. He’ll say I’m no 
physicist, or Sion either, not from his point of view, at 
least. He will dispute my figures, and I’m not going to get 
into the kind of argument where he tries to browbeat me 
for his own satisfaction. You, I can convince. I couldn’t 
begin to convince Sartorius, and I have no intention of 
trying.” 

“Then what do you want to do? He’s already started 
work. . . ” 

All his earlier animation had subsided, and he spoke in 
a monotone. I did not know if he trusted me, and I did not 
much care: 

“What do I want to do? Whatever a man does when his 
life is in danger.” 

“I’ll try to contact him. Maybe he can develop some 
kind of safety device. . . And then there’s the first plan. 
Would you cooperate? Sartorius would agree, I’m sure of 
it. At least it’s worth a try.” 

“You think so?” 

“No,” he snapped back. “But what have we got to 
lose?” 

I was in no hurry to accept. It was time that I needed, 
and Snow could help me to prolong the delay: 

“I’ll think about it.” 

“Okay, I’m going.” His bones creaked as he got up. 
“We’ll have to begin with the encephalogram,” he said, 
rubbing at his overall as if to get rid of some invisible 
stain. 

Without a word to Rheya, he walked to the door, and 
after it had closed behind him I got up and crumpled the 
sheet of paper in my hand. I had not falsified the equa- 


130 


tions, but I doubted whether Sion would have agreed with 
my extensions of his theory. I started abruptly, as Rheya’s 
hand touched my shoulder. 

“Kris, who is he?” 

“I told you. Dr. Snow.” 

“What’s he like?” 

“I don’t know him very well . . . why?” 

“He was giving me such a strange look.” 

“So you’re an attractive woman. . . .” 

“No, this was a different sort of look ... as if. . . .” She 
trembled, looked up at me momentarily, then lowered her 
eyes. “Let’s go back to the cabin.” 


131 


The Liquid Oxygen 


I have no idea how long I had been lying in the dark, 
staring at the luminous dial of my wristwatch. Hearing 
myself breathing, I felt a vague surprise, but my underly- 
ing feeling was one of profound indifference both to this 
ring of phosphorescent figures and to my own surprise. 
I told myself that the feeling was caused by fatigue. When 
I turned over, the bed seemed wider than usual. I held my 
breath; no sound broke the silence. Rheya’s breathing 
should have been audible. I reached out, but felt nothing. 
I was alone. 

I was about to call her name, when I heard the tread of 
heavy footsteps coming towards me. A numb calm de- 
scended: 

“Gibarian?” 

“Yes, it’s me. Don’t switch the light on.” 

“No?” 

“There’s no need, and it’s better for us to stay in the 
dark.” 

“But you are dead . . .” 

“Don’t let that worry you. You recognize my voice, 
don’t you?” 

“Yes. Why did you kill yourself?” 

“I had no choice. You arrived four days late. If you had 
come earlier, I would not have been forced to kill myself. 


132 


Don’t worry about it, though, I don’t regret anything.” 

“You really are there? I’m not asleep?” 

“Oh, you think you’re dreaming about me? As you did 
with Rheya?” 

“Where is she?” 

“How should I know?” 

“I have a feeling that you do.” 

“Keep your feelings for yourself. Let’s say I’m deputiz- 
ing for her.” 

“I want her here too!” 

“Not possible.” 

“Why not? You know very well that it isn’t the real you, 
just my . . .” 

“No, I am the real Gibarian— just a new incarnation. 
But let’s not waste time on useless chatter.” 

“You’ll be leaving again?” 

“Yes.” 

“And then she’ll come back?” 

“Why should you care about that?” 

“She belongs to me.” 

“You are afraid of her.” 

“No.” 

“She disgusts you.” 

“What do you want with me?” 

“Save your pity for yourself— you have a right to it — but 
not for her. She will always be twenty years old. You must 
know that.” 

I felt suddenly at ease again, for no apparent reason, 
and ready to hear him out. He seemed to have come 
closer, though I could not see him in the dark. 

“What do you want?” 

“Sartorius has convinced Snow that you have been de- 
ceiving him. Right now they are trying to give you the 
same treatment. Building the X-ray beamer is a cover for 
constructing a magnetic field disruptor.” 

“Where is she?” 

“Didn’t you hear me? I came to warn you.” 

“Where is she?” 

“I don’t know. Be careful. You must find some kind of 
weapon. You can’t trust anyone.” 


133 


“I can trust Rheya.” 

He stifled a laugh: “Of course, you can trust Rheya — to 
some extent. And you can always follow my example, if all 
else fails.” 

“You are not Gibarian.” 

“No? Then who am I? A dream?” 

“No, you are only a puppet. But you don’t realize that 
you are.” 

“And how do you know what you are?” 

I tried to stand up, but could not stir. Although 
Gibarian was still speaking, I could not understand his 
words; there was only the drone of his voice. I struggled 
to regain control of my body, felt a sudden wrench and 
... I woke up, and drew down great gulps of air. It was 
dark, and I had been having a nightmare. And now I heard 
a distant, monotonous voice: “. . . a dilemma that we are 
not equipped to solve. We are the cause of our own suffer- 
ings. The polytheres behave strictly as a kind of amplifier 
of our own thoughts. Any attempt to understand the moti- 
vation of these occurrences is blocked by our own an- 
thropomorphism. Where there are no men, there cannot 
be motives accessible to men. Before we can proceed with 
our research, either our own thoughts or their material- 
ized forms must be destroyed. It is not within our power 
to destroy our thoughts. As for destroying their material 
forms, that could be like committing murder.” 

I had recognized Gibarian’s voice at once. When I 
stretched out my arm, I found myself alone. I had fallen 
asleep again. This was another dream. I called Gibarian’s 
name, and the voice stopped in mid-sentence. There was 
the sound of a faint gasp, then a gust of air. 

“Well, Gibarian,” I yawned, “you seem to be following 
me out of one dream and into the next . . .” 

There was a rustling sound from somewhere close, and 
I called his name again. The bed-springs creaked, and a 
voice whispered in my ear: 

“Kris . . . it’s me . . .” 

“Rheya? Is it you? What about Gibarian?” 

“But . . . you said he was dead, Kris.” 

“He can be alive in a dream,” I told her dejectedly, 


134 


although I was not completely sure that it had been a 
dream. “He spoke to me ... He was here . . 

My head sank back onto the pillow. Rheya said some- 
thing, but I was already drifting into sleep. 

In the red light of morning, the events of the previous 
night returned. I had dreamt that I was talking to 
Gibarian. But afterwards, I could swear that I had heard 
his voice, although I had no clear recall of what he had 
said, and it had not been a conversation — more like a 
speech. 

Rheya was splashing about in the bathroom. I looked 
under the bed, where I had hidden the tape-recorder a few 
days earlier. It was no longer there. 

“Rheya!” She put her face round the door. “Did you see 
a tape-recorder under the bed, a little pocket one?” 

“There was a pile of stuff under the bed. I put it all over 
there.” She pointed to a shelf by the medicine cabinet, 
and disappeared back into the bathroom. 

There was no tape-recorder on the shelf, and when 
Rheya emerged from the bathroom I asked her to think 
again. She sat combing her hair, and did not answer. It 
was not until now that I noticed how pale she was, and how 
closely she was watching me in the mirror. I returned to 
the attack: 

“The tape-recorder is missing, Rheya.” 

“Is that all you have to tell me?” 

“I’m sorry. You’re right, it’s silly to get so worked up 
about a tape-recorder.” 

Anything to avoid a quarrel. 

Later, over breakfast, the change in Rheya’s behavior 
was obvious, yet I could not define it. She did not meet my 
eyes, and was frequently so lost in thought that she did not 
hear me. Once, when she looked up, her cheeks were 
damp. 

“Is anything the matter? You’re crying.” 

“Leave me alone,” Rheya blurted. “They aren’t real 
tears.” 

Perhaps I ought not to have let her answer so, but 
‘straight talking’ was the last thing I wanted. In any case, 
I had other problems on my mind; I had dreamt that Snow 


135 


and Sartorius were plotting against me, and although I 
was certain that it had been nothing more than a dream, 
I was wondering if there was anything in the Station that 
I might be able to use to defend myself. My thinking had 
not progressed to the point of deciding what to do with 
a weapon once I had it. I told Rheya that I had to make an 
inspection of the store-rooms, and she trailed behind me 
silently. 

I ransacked packing-cases and capsules, and when we 
reached the lower deck I was unable to resist looking into 
the cold store. Not wanting Rheya to go in, I put my head 
inside the door and looked around. The recumbent figure 
was still covered by its dark shroud, but from my position 
in the doorway I could not make out whether the black 
woman was still sleeping by Gibarian’s body. I had the 
impression that she was no longer there. 

I wandered from one store-room to another, unable to 
locate anything that might serve as a weapon, and with a 
rising feeling of depression. All at once I noticed that 
Rheya was not with me. Then she reappeared; she had 
been hanging back in the corridor. In spite of the pain she 
suffered when she could not see me, she had been trying 
to keep away. I should have been astonished: instead, I 
went on acting as if I had been offended— but then, who 
had offended me? — and sulking like a child. 

My head was throbbing, and I rifled the entire contents 
of the medicine-cabinet without finding so much as an 
aspirin. I did not want to go back to the sick bay. I did not 
want to do anything. I had never been in a blacker temper. 
Rheya tiptoed about the cabin like a shadow. Now and 
then she went off somewhere. I don’t know where, I 
was paying her no attention; then she would creep back in- 
side. 

That afternoon, in the kitchen (we had just eaten, but 
in fact Rheya had not touched her food, and I had not 
attempted to persuade her), Rheya got up and came to sit 
next to me. I felt her hand on my sleeve, and grunted: 
“What’s the matter?” 

I had been meaning to go up to the deck above, as the 
pipes were carrying the sharp crackling sound of high- 


136 


voltage apparatus in use, but Rheya would have had to 
come with me. It had been hard enough to justify her 
presence in the library; among the machinery, there was 
a chance that Snow might drop some clumsy remark. I 
gave up the idea of going to investigate. 

“Kris,” she whispered, “what’s happening to us?” 

I gave an involuntary sigh of frustration with everything 
that had been happening since the previous night: “Ev- 
erything is fine. Why?” 

“I want to talk.” 

“All right, I’m listening.” 

“Not like this.” 

“What? You know I have a head-ache, and that’s not the 
least of my worries . . .” 

“You’re not being fair.” 

I forced myself to smile; it must have been a poor imita- 
tion: “Go ahead and talk, darling, please.” 

“Will you tell me the truth?” 

“Why should I lie?” This was an ominous beginning. 

“You might have your reasons ... it might be necessary 
. . . But if you want . . . Look, I am going to tell you 
something, and then it will be your turn — only no half- 
truths. Promise!” I could not meet her gaze. “I’ve already 
told you that I don’t know how I came to be here. Perhaps 
you do. Wait! — perhaps you don’t. But if you do know, and 
you can’t tell me now, will you tell me one day, later on? 
I couldn’t be any the worse for it, and you would at least 
be giving me a chance.” 

“What are you talking about, child,” I stammered. 
“What chance?” 

“Kris, whatever I may be, I’m certainly not a child. You 
promised me an answer.” 

Whatever I may be . . . my throat tightened, and I stared 
at Rheya shaking my head like an imbecile, as if forbid- 
ding myself to hear any more. 

“I’m not asking for explanations. You only need to tell 
me that you are not allowed to say.” 

“I’m not hiding anything,” I croaked. 

“All right.” 

She stood up. I wanted to say something. We could not 


137 


leave it at that. But no words would come. 

“Rheya . . .” 

She was standing at the window, with her back turned. 
The blue-black ocean stretched out under a cloudless sky. 

“Rheya, if you believe ... You know very well I love 
you . . .” 

“Me?” 

I went to put my arms round her, but she pulled away. 

“You’re too kind,” she said. “You say you love me? I’d 
rather you beat me.” 

“Rheya, darling!” 

“No, no, don’t say any more.” 

She went back to the table and began to clear away the 
plates. I gazed out at the ocean. The sun was setting, and 
the Station cast a lengthening shadow that danced on the 
waves. Rheya dropped a plate on the floor. Water splashed 
in the sink. A tarnished golden halo ringed the horizon. 
If I only knew what to do ... if only . . . Suddenly there 
was silence. Rheya was standing behind me. 

“No, don’t turn round,” she murmured. “It isn’t your 
fault, I know. Don’t torment yourself.” 

I reached out, but she slipped away to the far side of the 
room and picked up a stack of plates: “It’s a shame they’re 
unbreakable. I’d like to smash them, all of them.” 

I thought for a moment that she really was going to 
dash them to the floor, but she looked across at me and 
smiled: “Don’t worry. I’m not going to make scenes.” 

In the middle of the night, I was suddenly wide awake. 
The room was in darkness and the door was ajar, with a 
faint light shining from the corridor. There was a shrill 
hissing noise, interspersed with heavy, muffled thudding, 
as if some heavy object was pounding against a wall. A 
meteor had pierced the shell of the Station! No, not a 
meteor, a shuttle, for I could hear a dreadful labored 
whining. . . . 

I shook myself. It was not a meteor, nor was it a shuttle. 
The sound was coming from somebody at the end of the 
corridor. I ran down to where light was pouring from the 
door of the little work-room, and rushed inside. A freez- 
ing vapor filled the room, my breath fell like snow, and 


138 


white flakes swirled over a body covered by a dressing- 
gown, stirring feebly then striking the floor again. I could 
hardly see through the freezing mist. I snatched her up 
and folded her in my arms, and the dressing-gown burnt 
my skin. Rheya kept on making the same harsh gasping 
sound as I stumbled along the corridor, no longer feeling 
the cold, only her breath on my neck, burning like fire. 

I lowered Rheya onto the operating-table and pulled the 
dressing-gown open. Her face was contorted with pain, 
the lips covered by a thick, black layer of frozen blood, the 
tongue a mass of sparkling ice crystals. 

Liquid oxygen . . . The Dewar bottles in the workroom 
contained liquid oxygen. Splinters of glass had crunched 
underfoot as I carried Rheya out. How much of it had she 
swallowed? It didn’t matter. Her trachea, throat and lungs 
must be burnt away — liquid oxygen corrodes flesh more 
effectively than strong acids. Her breathing was more and 
more labored, with a dry sound like tearing paper. Her 
eyes were closed. She was dying. 

I looked across at the big, glass-fronted cabinets, 
crammed with instruments and drugs. Tracheotomy? In- 
tubation? She had no lungs! I stared at shelves full of 
colored bottles and cartons. She went on gasping 
hoarsely, and a wisp of vapor drifted out of her open 
mouth. 

Thermophores . . . 

I started looking for them, then changed my mind, ran 
to another cupboard and turned out boxes of ampoules. 
Now a hypodermic — where are they? — here — needs ste- 
rilizing. I fumbled with the lid of the sterilizer, but my 
numb fingers had lost all sensation and would not bend. 

The harsh rattle grew louder, and Rheya’s eyes were 
open when I reached the table. I opened my mouth to say 
her name but my voice had gone and my lips would not 
obey me. My face did not belong to me; it was a plaster 
mask. 

Rheya’s ribs were heaving under the white skin. The 
ice-crystals had melted and her wet hair was entangled in 
the headrest. And she was looking at me. 

“Rheya!” It was all I could say. I stood paralyzed, my 


139 


hands dangling uselessly, until a burning sensation 
mounted from my legs and attacked my lips and eyelids. 

A drop of blood melted and slanted down her cheek. 
Her tongue quivered and receded. The labored panting 
went on. 

I could feel no pulse in her wrist, and put my ear against 
her frozen breast. Faintly, behind the raging blizzard, her 
heart was beating so fast that I could not count the beats, 
and I remained crouched over her, with my eyes closed. 
Something brushed my head— Rheya’s hand in my hair. I 
stood up. 

“Kris!” A harsh gasp. 

I took her hand, and the answering pressure made my 
bones creak. Then her face screwed up with agony, and 
she lost consciousness again. Her eyes turned up, a gut- 
tural rattle tore at her throat, and her body arched with 
convulsions. It was all I could do to keep her on the opera- 
ting table; she broke free and her head cracked against a 
porcelain basin. I dragged her back, and struggled to hold 
her down, but violent spasms kept jerking her out of my 
grasp. I was pouring with sweat, and my legs were like 
jelly. When the convulsions abated, I tried to make her lie 
flat, but her chest thrust out to gulp at the air. Suddenly 
her eyes were staring out at me from behind the frightful 
blood-stained mask of her face. 

“Kris . . . how long . . . how long?” 

She choked. Pink foam appeared at her mouth, and the 
convulsions racked her again. With my last reserves of 
strength I bore down on her shoulders, and she fell back. 
Her teeth chattered loudly. 

“No, no, no,” she wimpered suddenly, and I thought 
that death was near. 

But the spasms resumed, and again I had to hold her 
down. Now and then she swallowed drily, and her ribs 
heaved. Then the eyelids half closed over the unseeing 
eyes, and she stiffened. This must be the end. I did not 
even try to wipe the foam from her mouth. A distant 
ringing throbbed in my head. I was waiting for her final 
breath before my strength failed and I collapsed to the 
ground. 

She went on breathing, and the rasp was now only a 


140 


light sigh. Her chest, which had stopped heaving, moved 
again to the rapid rhythm of her heartbeat. Color was 
returning to her cheeks. Still I did not realize what was 
happening. My hands were clammy, and I heard as if 
through layers of cotton wool, yet the ringing sound con- 
tinued. 

Rheya’s eye-lids moved, and our eyes met. 

I could not speak her name from behind the mask of my 
face. All I could do was look at her. 

She turned her head and looked round the room. 
Somewhere behind me, in another world, a tap dripped. 
Rheya levered herself up on her elbow. I recoiled, and 
again our eyes met. 

“It ... it didn’t work,” she stammered. “Why are you 
looking at me like that?” Then she screamed out loud: 
“Why are you looking at me like that?” 

Still I could say nothing. She examined her hands, 
moved her fingers . . . 

“Is this me?” 

My lips formed her name, and she repeated it as a 
question — “Rheya?” 

She let herself slide off the operating table, staggered, 
regained her balance and took a few steps. She was mov- 
ing in a daze, and looking at me without appearing to see 
me. 

“Rheya? But ... I am not Rheya. Who am I then? And 
you, what about you?” Her eyes widened and sparkled, 
and an astonished smile lit up her face. “And you, Kris. 
Perhaps you too . . .” 

I had backed away until I came up against the wall. The 
smile vanished. 

“No. You are afraid. I can’t take any more of this, I can’t 
. . . I didn’t know, I still don’t understand. It’s not possi- 
ble.” Her clenched fists struck her chest. “What else could 
I think, except that I was Rheya! Maybe you believe this is 
all an act? It isn’t, I swear it isn’t.” 

Something snapped in my mind, and I went to put my 
arms round her, but she fought free: 

“Don’t touch me! Leave me alone! I disgust you, I know 
I do. Keep away! I’m not Rheya . . .” 

We screamed at each other and Rheya tried to keep me 


141 


at arms’ length. I would not let her go, and at last she let 
her head fall to my shoulder. We were on our knees, 
breathless and exhausted. 

“Kris . . . what do I have to do to put a stop to this?” 

“Be quiet!” 

“You don’t know!” She lifted her head and stared at 
me. “It can’t be done, can it?” 

“Please . . 

“I really tried . . . No, go away. I disgust you — and 
myself, I disgust myself. If I only knew how . . 

“You would kill yourself.” 

“Yes.” 

“But I want you to stay alive. I want you here, more than 
anything.” 

“You’re lying.” 

“Tell me what I have to do to convince you. You are 
here. You exist. I can’t see any further than that.” 

“It can’t possibly be true, because I am not Rheya.” 

“Then who are you?” 

There was a long silence. Then she bowed her head and 
murmured: 

“Rheya . . . But I know that I am not the woman you once 
loved.” 

“Yes. But that was a long time ago. That past does not 
exist, but you do, here and now. Don’t you see?” 

She shook her head: 

“I know that it was kindness that made you behave as 
you did, but there is nothing to be done. That first morn- 
ing when I found myself waiting by your bed for you to 
wake up, I knew nothing. I can hardly believe it was only 
three days ago. I behaved like a lunatic. Everything was 
misty. I didn’t remember anything, wasn’t surprised by 
anything. It was like recovering from a drugged sleep, or 
a long illness. It even occurred to me that I might have 
been ill and you didn’t want to tell me. Then a few things 
happened to set me thinking — you know what I mean. So 
after you met that man in the library and you refused to 
tell me anything, I made up my mind to listen to that tape. 
That was the only time I have lied to you, Kris. When you 
were looking for the tape-recorder, I knew where it was. 


142 


I’d hidden it. The man who recorded the tape — what was 
his name?” 

“Gibarian.” 

“Yes, Gibarian — he explained everything. Although I 
still don’t understand. The only thing missing was that I 
can’t . . . that there is no end. He didn’t mention that, or 
if he did it was after you woke up and I had to switch off. 
But I heard enough to realize that I am not a human being, 
only an instrument.” 

“What are you talking about?” 

“That’s what I am. To study your reactions — something 
of that sort. Each one of you has a ... an instrument like 
me. We emerge from your memory or your imagination, 
I can’t say exactly — anyway you know better than I. He 
talks about such terrible things ... so far fetched ... if 
it did not fit in with everything else I would certainly have 
refused to believe him.” 

“The rest?” 

“Oh, things like not needing sleep, and being com- 
pelled to go wherever you go. When I think that only 
yesterday I was miserable because I thought you detested 
me. How stupid! But how could I have imagined the truth? 
He — Gibarian — didn’t hate that woman, the one who 
came to him, but he refers to her in such a dreadful way. 
It wasn’t until then that I realized that I was helpless what- 
ever I did, and that I couldn’t avoid torturing you. More 
than that though, an instrument of torture is passive, like 
the stone that falls on somebody and kills them. But an 
instrument of torture which loves you and wishes you 
nothing but good — it was too much for me. I wanted 
to tell you the little that I had understood. I told myself 
that it might be useful to you. I even tried to make 
notes. . . .” 

“That time when you had the light switched on?” 

“Yes. But I couldn’t write anything. I searched myself 

for . . . you know, some sign of ‘influence’ I was going 

mad. I felt as if there was no body underneath my skin and 
there was something else instead: as if I was just an illu- 
sion meant to mislead you. You see?” 

“I see.” 


143 


“When you can’t sleep at night and your mind keeps 
spinning for hours on end, it can take you far away; you 
find yourself moving in strange directions . . 

“I know what you mean.” 

“But I could feel my heart beating. And then I remem- 
bered that you had made an analysis of my blood. What 
did you find? You can tell me the truth now.” 

“Your blood is like my own.” 

“Truly?” 

“I give you my word.” 

“What does that indicate? I had been telling myself that 
the . . . unknown force might be concealed somewhere 
inside me, and that it might not occupy very much space. 
But I did not know whereabouts it was. I think now that 
I was evading the real issue because I didn’t have the 
nerve to make a decision. I was afraid, and I looked for a 
way out. But Kris, if my blood is like yours ... if I really 
. . . no, it’s impossible. I would already be dead, wouldn’t 
I? That means there really is something different — but 
where? In the mind? Yet it seems to me that I think as any 
human being does . . and I know nothing! If that alien 
thing was thinking in my head, I would know everything. 
And I would not love you. I would be pretending, and 
aware that I was pretending. Kris, you’ve got to tell me 
everything you know. Perhaps we could work out a solu- 
tion between us.” 

“What kind of solution?” She fell silent. “Is it death you 
want?” 

“Yes, I think it is.” 

Again silence. Rheya sat on the floor, her knees drawn 
up under her chin. I looked around at the white-enamelled 
fittings and gleaming instruments, perhaps looking for 
some unsuspected clue to suddenly materialize. 

“Rheya, I have something to say, too.” She waited qui- 
etly. “It is true that we are not exactly alike. But there is 
nothing wrong with that. In any case, whatever else we 
might think about it, that . . . difference . . . saved your 
life.” 

A painful smile flickered over her face: “Does that mean 
that lam... immortal?” 


144 



“I don’t know. At any rate, you’re far less vulnerable 
than I am.” 

“It’s horrible ” 

“Perhaps not as horrible as you think.” 

“But you don’t envy me.” 

“Rheya, I don’t know what your fate will be. It cannot 
be predicted, any more than my own or any other mem- 
bers’ of the Station’s personnel. The experiment will go 
on, and anything can happen . . 

“Or nothing.” 

“Or nothing. And I have to confess that nothing is what 
I would prefer. Not because I’m frightened — though fear 
is undeniably an element of this business — but because 
there can’t be any final outcome. I’m quite sure of that.” 

“Outcome? You mean the ocean?” 

“Yes, contact with the ocean. As I see it, the problem 
is basically very simple. Contact means the exchange of 
specific knowledge, ideas, or at least of findings, definite 
facts. But what if no exchange is possible? If an elephant 
is not a giant microbe, the ocean is not a giant brain. 
Obviously there can be various approaches, and the 
consequence of one of them is that you are here, now, with 
me. And I am trying my hardest to make you realize that 
I love you. Just your being here cancels out the twelve 
years of my life that went into the study of Solaris, and I 
want to keep you. 

“You may have been sent to torment me, or to make my 
life happier, or as an instrument ignorant of its function, 
used like a microscope with me on the slide. Possibly you 
are here as a token of friendship, or a subtle punishment, 
or even as a joke. It could be all of those at once, or — 
which is more probable — something else completely. If 
you say that our future depends on the ocean’s intentions, 
I can’t deny it. I can’t tell the future any more than you can. 
I can’t even swear that I shall always love you. After what 
has happened already, we can expect anything. Suppose 
tomorrow it turns me into a green jellyfish! It’s out of our 
hands. But the decision we make today is in our hands. 
Let’s decide to stay together. What do you say?” 

“Listen Kris, there’s something else I must ask you 


145 


. . . Am I ... do I look very like her?” 

“You did at first. Now I don’t know.” 

“I don’t understand.” 

“Now all I see is you.” 

“You’re sure?” 

“Yes. If you really were her, I might not be able to love 
you.” 

“Why?” 

“Because of what I did.” 

“Did you treat her badly?” 

“Yes, when we . . .” 

“Don’t say any more.” 

“Why not?” 

“So that you won’t forget that I am the one who is here, 
not her.” 


146 



Conversation 


The following morning, I received another note from 
Snow: Sartorius had left off working on the disruptor and 
was getting ready for a final experiment with high-power 
X-rays. 

“Rheya, darling, I have to pay a visit to Snow.” 

The red dawn blazing through the window divided the 
room in two. We were in an area of blue shadow. Every- 
thing outside this shadow-zone was burnished copper: if 
a book had fallen from a shelf, my ear would have listened 
instinctively for a metallic clang. 

“It’s to do with the experiment. Only I don’t know what 
to do about it. Please understand, I’d rather . . .” 

“You needn’t justify yourself, Kris. If only it doesn’t go 
on too long.” 

It s bound to take a while. Look, do you think you 
could wait in the corridor?” 

“I can try. But what if I lose control?” 

“What does it feel like? I’m not asking just out of curi- 
osity, believe me, but if we can discuss how it works you 
might find some way of keeping it in check.” 

Rheya had turned pale, but she tried to explain: 

I feel afraid, not of some thing or some person — 
there’s no focus, only a sense of being lost. And I am 
terribly ashamed of myself. Then, when you come back, 


147 


it stops. That’s what made me think I might have been ill.” 

‘‘Perhaps it’s only inside this damned Station that it 
works. I’ll make arrangements for us to get out as soon 
as possible.” 

‘‘Do you think you can?” 

“Why not? I’m not a prisoner here. I’ll have to talk it 
over with Snow. Have you any idea how long you could 
manage to remain by yourself?” 

“That depends ... If I could hear your voice, I think I 
might be able to hold out.” 

“I’d rather you weren’t listening. Not that I have any- 
thing to hide, but there’s no telling what Snow might say.” 

“You needn’t go on. I understand. I’ll just stand close 
enough to hear the sound of your voice.” 

“I’m going to the operating room to phone him. The 
doors will be open.” 

Rheya nodded agreement. 

I crossed the red zone. The corridor seemed dark by 
contrast, in spite of the lighting. Inside the open door of 
the operating room, fragments of the Dewar bottle, the 
last traces of the previous night’s events, gleamed from 
under a row of liquid oxygen containers. When I took the 
phone off the hook, the little screen lit up, and I tapped 
out the number of the radio cabin. Behind the dull glass, 
a spot of bluish light grew, burst, and Snow was looking 
at me, perched on the edge of his chair. 

“I got your note and I want to talk to you. Can I come 
over?” 

“Yes. Right away?” 

“Yes.” 

“Excuse me, but are you coming alone or . . . accom- 
panied?” 

“Alone.” 

His creased forehead and thin, tanned face filled the 
screen as he leant forward to scrutinize me through the 
convex glass. Then he appeared to reach an abrupt deci- 
sion: 

“Fine, fine, I’ll be expecting you.” 

I went back to the cabin, where I could barely make out 
the shape of Rheya behind the curtain of red sunlight. She 


148 


was sitting in an armchair, with her hands clutching the 
armrests. She must have failed to hear my footsteps, and 
I saw her for a moment fighting the inexplicable compul- 
sion that possessed her and wrestling with the fierce con- 
tractions of her entire body which stopped immediately 
she saw me. I choked back a feeling of blind rage and pity. 

We walked in silence down the long corridor with its 
polychromed walls; the designers had intended the varia- 
tions in color to make life more tolerable inside the ar- 
mored shell of the Station. A shaft of red light ahead of 
us meant that the door of the radio cabin was ajar, and I 
looked at Rheya. She made no attempt to return my smile, 
totally absorbed in her preparations for the coming battle 
with herself. Now that the ordeal was about to begin, her 
face was pinched and white. Fifteen paces from the door, 
she stopped, pushing me forward gently with her finger- 
tips as I started to turn around. Suddenly I felt that Snow, 
the experiment, even the Station itself were not worth the 
agonizing price that Rheya was ready to pay, with myself 
as assistant torturer. I would have retraced my steps, but 
a shadow fell across the cabin doorway, and I hurried 
inside. 

Snow stood facing me with the red sun behind him 
making a halo of purple light out of his grey hair. We 
confronted one another without speaking, and he was 
able to examine me at his leisure in the sunlight that 
dazzled me so that I could hardly see him. 

I walked past him and leaned against a tall desk bris- 
tling with microphones on their flexible stalks. Snow pi- 
voted slowly and went on staring at me with his habitual 
cheerless smile, in which there was no amusement, only 
overpowering fatigue. Still with his eyes on mine, he 
picked his way through the piles of objects littered about 
the cabin — thermic cells, instruments, spare parts for the 
electronic equipment — pulled a stool up against the door 
of a steel cabinet, and sat down. 

I listened anxiously, but no sound came from the corri- 
dor. Why did Snow not speak? The prolonged silence was 
becoming exasperating. 

I cleared my throat: 


149 


“When will you and Sartorius be ready?” 

“We can start today, but the recording will take some 
time.” 

“Recording? You mean the encephalogram?” 

“Yes, you agreed. Is anything wrong?” 

“No, nothing.” 

Another lengthening silence. Snow broke it: 

“Did you have something to tell me?” 

“She knows,” I whispered. 

He frowned, but I had the impression that he was not 
really surprised. Then why pretend? I lost all desire to 
confide in him. All the same, I had to be honest: 

“She started to suspect after our meeting in the library. 
My behavior, various other indications. Then she found 
Gibarian’s tape-recorder and played back the tape.” 

Snow sat intent and unmoving. Standing by the desk, 
my view of the corridor was blocked by the half-open 
door. I lowered my voice again: 

“Last night, while I was asleep, she tried to kill herself. 
She drank liquid oxygen . . .” There was a sound of rus- 
tling, like papers stirred by the wind. I stopped and lis- 
tened for something in the corridor, but the noise did not 
come from there. A mouse in the cabin? Out of the ques- 
tion, this was Solaris. I stole a glance at Snow. 

“Go on,” he said calmly. 

“It didn’t work, of course. Anyway, she knows who she 

is.” 

'“Why tell me?” 

I was taken aback for an instant, then I stammered out: 

“So as to inform you, to keep you up to date on the 
situation . . .” 

“I warned you.” 

“You mean you knew?” My voice rose involuntarily. 

“What you have just told me? Of course not. But I 
explained deposition. When it arrives, the visitor is al- 
most blank — only a ghost made up of memories and 
vague images dredged out of its . . . source. The longer 
it stays with you, the more human it becomes. It also 
becomes more independent, up to a certain point. And 


150 


the longer that goes on, the more difficult it gets . . 
Snow broke off, looked me up and down, and went on 
reluctantly: “Does she know everything?” 

“Yes, I’ve just told you.” 

“Everything? Does she know that she came once 
before, and that you . . 

“No!” 

“Listen Kelvin,” he smiled ruefully, “if that’s how it is, 
what do you want to do — leave the Station?” 

“Yes.” 

“With her?” 

“Yes.” 

The silence while he considered his reply also revealed 
something else. Again, from somewhere close, and with- 
out being able to pin it down, I heard the same faint 
rustling in the cabin, as if through a thin partition. 

Snow shifted on his stool. 

“All right. Why look at me like that? Do you think I 
would stand in your way? You can do as you like, Kelvin. 
We’re in enough trouble already without putting pressure 
on each other. I know it will be a hopeless job to convince 
you, but there’s something I have to say: you are doing all 
you can to stay human in an inhuman situation. Noble it 
may be, but it isn’t going to get you anywhere. And I’m 
not so sure about it being noble — not if it’s idiotic at the 
same time. But that’s your affair. Let’s get back to the 
point. You renege on the experiment and take her away 
with you. Has it struck you that you’ll only be embarking 
on a different kind of experiment?” 

“What do you mean? If you want to know whether she 
can manage it, as long as I’m with her, I don’t see ...” I 
trailed to a halt. 

Snow sighed: 

“All of us have our heads in the sand, Kelvin, and we 
know it. There’s no need to put on airs.” 

“I’m not putting anything on.” 

“I’m sorry, I didn’t want to offend you. I take back the 
airs, but I still think that you are playing the ostrich game 
— and a particularly dangerous version. You deceive 


151 


yourself, you deceive her, and you chase your own tail. Do 
you know the necessary conditions for stabilizing a neu- 
trino field?” 

“No, and nor do you. Nor does anyone.” 

“Exactly. All we know is that the structure is inherently 
unstable, and can only be maintained by means of a con- 
tinuous energy input. Sartorius told me that. This energy 
creates a rotating stabilization field. Now, does that en- 
ergy come from outside the ‘visitor,’ or is it generated 
internally? You see the difference?” 

“Yes. If it is external, she . . .” 

Snow finished the sentence for me: 

“Away from Solaris, the structure disintegrates. It’s 
only a theory, of course, but one that you can verify, since 
you have already set up an experiment. The vehicle you 
launched is still in orbit. In my spare moments, I’ve even 
calculated its trajectory. You can take off, intercept, and 
find out what happened to the passenger . . 

“You’re out of your mind,” I yelled. 

“You think so? And what if we brought the shuttle down 
again? No problem — it’s on remote control. We’ll bring 
it out of orbit, and . . 

“Shut up!” 

“That won’t do either? There’s another method, a very 
simple one. It doesn’t involve bringing the shuttle down, 
only establishing radio contact. If she’s alive, she’ll reply, 
and ...” P 7 

“The oxygen would have run out days ago.” 

“She may not need it. Shall we try?” 

“Snow . . . Snow . . .” 

He mimicked my intonation angrily: 

“Kelvin . . . Kelvin . . . Think, just a little. Are you a man 
or not? Who are you trying to please? Who do you want 
to save? Yourself? Her? And which version of her? This 
one or that one? Haven’t you got the guts to face them 
both? Surely you realize that you haven’t thought it 
through. Let me tell you one last time, we are in a situation 
that is beyond morality.” 

The rustling noise returned, and this time it sounded 
like nails scraping on a wall. All at once I was filled with 


152 


a dull indifference. I saw myself, I saw both of us, from a 
long way off, as if through the wrong end of a telescope, 
and everything looked meaningless, trivial, and slightly 
ridiculous. 

“So what do you suggest? Send up another shuttle? She 
would be back tomorrow. And the day after, and the day 
after that. How long do you want it to go on? What’s the 
good of disposing of her if she keeps returning? How 
would it help me, or you, or Sartorius, or the Station?” 

“No, here’s my suggestion: leave with her. You’ll 
witness the transformation. After a few minutes, you’ll 
see . . .” 

“What? A monster, a demon?” 

“No, you’ll see her die, that’s all. Don’t think that they 
are immortal — I promise you that they die. And then what 
will you do? Come back . . . for a fresh sample?” He stared 
at me with bantering condescension. 

“That’s enough!” I burst out, clenching my fists. 

“Oh, I’m the one who has to be quiet? Look, I didn’t 
start this conversation, and as far as I’m concerned it has 
gone on long enough. Let me just suggest some ways for 
you to amuse yourself. You could scourge the ocean with 
rods, for instance. You’ve got it into your head that you’re 
a traitor if you . . .” He waved his hand in farewell, and 
raised his head as if to watch an imaginary ship in flight. 

. . and a good man if you keep her. Smiling when you 
feel like screaming, and shamming cheerful when you 
want to beat your head against a wall, isn’t that being a 
traitor? What if it is not possible, here, to be anything but 
a traitor? What will you do? Take it out on that bastard 
Snow, who is the cause of it all? In that case, Kelvin, you 
just put the lid on the rest of your troubles by acting like 
a complete idiot!” 

“You are talking from your own point of view. I love 
this girl.” 

“Her memory, you mean?” 

“No, herself. I told you what she tried to do. How many 
‘real’ human beings would have that much courage?” 

“So you admit . . .” 

“Don’t quibble.” 


153 


“Right. So she loves you. And you want to love her. It 
isn’t the same thing.” 

“You’re wrong.” 

“I’m sorry, Kelvin, but it was your idea to spill all this. 
You don’t love her. You do love her. She is willing to give 
her life. So are you. It’s touching, it’s magnificent, any- 
thing you like, but it’s out of place here — it’s the wrong 
setting. Don’t you see? No, you don’t want to. You are 
going around in circles to satisfy the curiosity of a power 
we don’t understand and can’t control, and she is an as- 
pect, a periodic manifestation of that power. If she was 
. . . if you were being pestered by some infatuated hag, you 
wouldn’t think twice about packing her off, right?” 

“I suppose so.” 

“Well then, that probably explains why she is not a hag! 
You feel as if your hands are tied? That’s just it, they are!” 

“All you are doing is adding one more theory to the 
millions of theories in the library. Leave me alone Snow, 
she is . . . No, I won’t say any more.” 

“It’s up to you. But remember that she is a mirror that 
reflects a part of your mind. If she is beautiful, it’s because 
your memories are. You provide the formula. You can 
only finish where you started, don’t forget that.” 

“What do you expect me to do? Send her away? I’ve 
already asked you why, and you don’t answer.” 

“I’ll give you an answer. It was you who wanted this 
conversation, not me. I haven’t meddled with your affairs, 
and I’m not telling you what to do or what not to do. Even 
if I had the right, I would not. You come here of your own 
free will, and you dump it all on me. You know why? To 
take the weight off your own back. Well I’ve experienced 
that weight — don’t try to shut me up — and I leave you free 
to find your own solution. But you want opposition. If I 
got in your way, you could fight me, something tangible, 
a man just like you, with the same flesh and blood. Fight 
me, and you could feel that you too were a man. When I 
don’t give you the excuse to fight, you quarrel with me, or 
rather with yourself. The one thing you’ve left out is tell- 
ing me you’d die of grief if she suddenly disappeared 
. . . No, please, I’ve heard enough!” 


154 


I countered clumsily: 

“I came to tell you, because I thought you ought to 
know, that I intend leaving the Station with her.” 

“Still on the same tack,” Snow shrugged. “I only off- 
ered my opinion because I realized that you were losing 
touch with reality. And the further you go, the harder you 
fall. Can you come and see Sartorius around nine tomor- 
row morning?” 

“Sartorius? I thought he wasn’t letting anybody in. You 
told me you couldn’t even phone him.” 

“He seems to have reached some kind of settlement. 
We never discuss our domestic troubles. With you, it’s 
another matter. Will you come tomorrow morning?” 

“All right,” I grunted. 

I noticed that Snow had slipped his left hand inside the 
cabinet. How long had the door been ajar? Probably for 
some time, but in the heat of the encounter I had not 
registered that the position of his hand was not natural. 
It was as if he was concealing something — or holding 
somebody’s hand. 

I licked my lips: 

“Snow, what have you . . .” 

“You’d better leave now,” he said evenly. 

I closed the door in the final glow of the red twilight. 
Rheya was huddled against the wall a few paces down the 
corridor. She sprang to her feet a * once: 

“You see? I did it Kris. I feel so much better . . . Perhaps 
it will be easier and easier . . .” 

“Yes, of course ...” I answered absently. 

We went back to my quarters. I was still speculating 
about that cabinet, and what had been hiding there, per- 
haps overhearing our entire conversation. My cheeks 
started to burn so hard that I involuntarily passed the back 
of my hand over them. What an idiotic meeting! And 
where did it get us? Nowhere. But there was tomorrow 
morning . . . 

An abrupt thrill of fear ran through me. My encephalo- 
gram, a complete record of the workings of my brain, was 
to be beamed into the ocean in the form of radiation. 
What was it Snow had said — would I suffer terribly if 


155 


Rheya departed? An encephalogram records every mental 
process, conscious and unconscious. If I want her to 
disappear, will it happen? But if I wanted to get rid of her 
would I also be appalled at the thought of her imminent 
destruction? Am I responsible for my unconscious? No 
one else is, if not myself. How stupid to agree to let them 
do it. Obviously I can examine the recording before it is 
used, but I won’t be able to decode it. Nobody could. The 
experts can only identify general mental tendencies. For 
instance, they will say that the subject is thinking about 
some mathematical problem, but they are unable to spec- 
ify its precise terms. They claim that they have to stick to 
generalizations because the encephalogram cannot dis- 
criminate among the stream of simultaneous impulses, 
only some of which have any psychological “counterpart,” 
and they refuse point-blank to hazard any comment on the 
unconscious processes. So how could they be expected to 
decipher memories which have been more or less re- 
pressed? 

Then why was I so afraid? I had told Rheya only that 
morning that the experiment could not work. If Terran 
neurophysiologists were incapable of decoding the re- 
cording, what chance was there for that great alien crea- 
ture . . . ? 

Yet it had infiltrated my mind without my knowledge, 
surveyed my memory, and laid bare my most vulnerable 
point. That was undeniable. Without any assistance or 
radiation transmissions, it had found its way through the 
armored shell of the Station, located me, and come away 
with its spoils . . . 

“Kris?” Rheya whispered. 

Standing at the window with unseeing eyes, I had not 
noticed the coming of darkness. A thin ceiling of high 
cloud glowed a dim silver in the light of the vanished sun, 
and obscured the stars. 

If she disappears after the experiment, that will mean 
that I wanted her to disappear — that I killed her. No, I will 
not see Sartorius. They can’t force me to cooperate. But 
I can’t tell them the truth, I’ll have to dissemble and lie, 
and keep on doing it . . . Because there may be thoughts, 


156 


intentions and cruel hopes in my mind of which I know 
nothing, because I am a murderer unawares. Man has 
gone out to explore other worlds and other civilizations 
without having explored his own labyrinth of dark pas- 
sages and secret chambers, and without finding what lies 
behind doorways that he himself has sealed. Was I to 
abandon Rheya there out of false shame, or because I 
lacked the courage? 

“Kris,” said Rheya, more softly still. 

She was standing quite close to me now. I pretended 
not to hear. At that moment, I wanted to isolate myself. 
I had not yet resolved anything, or reached any decision. 
I stood motionless, looking at the dark sky and the cold 
stars, pale ghosts of the stars that shone on Earth. My 
mind was a blank. All I had was the grim certainty of 
having crossed some point of no return. I refused to ad- 
mit that I was travelling towards what I could not reach. 
Apathy robbed me of the strength even to despise myself. 


157 


The Thinkers 


“Kris, is it the experiment that’s on your mind?” 

The sound of her voice made me start with surprise. I 
had been lying in the dark for hours with my eyes open, 
unable to sleep. Not hearing Rheya’s breathing, I had 
forgotten her, letting myself drift in a tide of aimless 
speculation. The waking dream had lured me out of sight 
of the measure and meaning of reality. 

“How did you know I wasn’t asleep?” 

“Your breathing changes when you are asleep,” she 
said gently, as if to apologize for her question. “I didn’t 
want to interfere ... If you can’t answer, don’t.” 

“Why would I not tell you? Anyway you’ve guessed 
right, it is the experiment.” 

“What do they expect to achieve?” 

“They don’t know themselves. Something. Anything. It 
isn t ‘Operation Brainwave,’ it’s ‘Operation Desperation.’ 
Really, one of us ought to have the courage to call the 
experiment off and shoulder the responsibility for the 
decision, but the majority reckons that that kind of cour- 
age would be a sign of cowardice, and the first step in a 
retreat. They think it would mean an undignified surren- 
der for mankind — as if there was any dignity in flounder- 
ing and drowning in what we don’t understand and never 
will.” I stopped, but a new access of rage quickly built up. 


158 


“Needless to say they’re not short of arguments. They 
claim that even if we fail to establish contact we won’t have 
been wasting our time investigating the plasma, and that 
we shall eventually uncover the secret of matter. They 
know very well that they are deceiving themselves. It’s like 
wandering about in a library where all the books are writ- 
ten in an indecipherable language. The only thing that’s 
familiar is the color of the bindings!” 

“Are there no other planets like this?” 

“It’s possible. This is the only one we’ve come across. 
In any case, it’s in an extremely rare category, not like 
Earth. Earth is a common type — the grass of the universel 
And we pride ourselves on this universality. There’s no- 
where we can’t go; in that belief we set out for other 
worlds, all brimming with confidence. And what were we 
going to do with them? Rule them or be ruled by them: 
that was the only idea in our pathetic minds! What a use- 
less waste. . 

I got out of bed and fumbled in the medicine cabinet. 
My fingers recognized the shape of the big bottle of sleep- 
ing pills, and I turned around in the darkness: 

“I’m going to sleep darling.” Up in the ceiling, the 
ventilator hummed. “I must get some sleep . . 

In the morning, I woke up feeling calm and refreshed. 
The experiment seemed a petty matter, and I could not 
understand how I had managed to take the encephalo- 
gram so seriously. Nor was I much bothered by having to 
bring Rheya into the laboratory. In spite of all her exer- 
tions, she could not bear to stay out of sight and earshot 
for longer than five minutes, so I had abandoned my idea 
of further tests (she was even prepared to let herself be 
locked up somewhere), asked her to come with me, and 
advised her to bring something to read. 

I was especially curious about what I would find in the 
laboratory. There was nothing unusual about the appear- 
ance of the big, blue and white-painted room, except that 
the shelves and cupboards meant to contain glass instru- 
ments seemed bare. The glass panel in one door was 
starred, and in some doors it was missing altogether, 
suggesting that there had been a struggle here recently, 


159 


and that someone had done his best to remove the traces. 

Snow busied himself with the equipment, and behaved 
quite civilly, showing no surprise at the sight of Rheya, 
and greeting her with a quick nod of the head. 

I was lying down, and Snow was swabbing my temples 
and forehead with saline solution, when a narrow door 
opened and Sartorius emerged from an unlighted room. 
He was wearing a white smock and a black anti-radiation 
overall that came down to his ankles, and his greeting was 
authoritative and very professional in manner. We might 
have been two researchers in some great institute on 
Earth, continuing from where we had left off the day 
before. He was not wearing his dark glasses, but I noticed 
that he had on contact lenses, which I took to be the 
explanation of his lack of expression. 

Sartorius looked on with arms folded as Snow attached 
the electrodes and wrapped a bandage around my head. 
He looked around the room several times, ignoring 
Rheya, who sat on a stool with her back against the wall, 
pretending to read. 

Snow stepped back, and I moved my head, which was 
bulging with metal discs and wires, to watch him switch 
on. At this point Sartorius raised his hand and launched 
into a flowery speech: 

“Dr. Kelvin, may I have your attention and concentra- 
tion for a moment. I do not intend to dictate any precise 
sequence of thought to you, for that would invalidate the 
experiment, but I do insist that you cease thinking of 
yourself, of me, our colleague Snow, or anybody else. 
Make an effort to eliminate any intrusion of individual 
personalities, and concentrate on the matter in hand. 
Earth and Solaris; the body of scientists considered as a 
single entity, although generations succeed each other 
and man as an individual has a limited span; our aspira- 
tions, and our perseverance in the attempt to establish an 
intellectual contact; the long historic march of humanity, 
our own certitude of furthering that advance, and our 
determination to renounce all personal feelings in order 
to accomplish our mission; the sacrifices that we are pre- 
pared to make, and the hardships we stand ready to over- 


160 


come . . . These are the themes that might properly oc- 
cupy your awareness. The association of ideas does not 
depend entirely on your own will. However, the very fact 
of your presence here bears out the authenticity of the 
progression I have drawn to your attention. If you are 
unsure that you have acquitted yourself of your task, say 
so, I beg you, and our colleague Snow will make another 
recording. We have plenty of time.” 

A dry little smile flickered over his face as he spoke 
these last words, but his expression remained morose. I 
was still trying to unravel the pompous phraseology which 
he had spun out with the utmost gravity. 

Snow broke the lengthening silence: 

“Ready Kris?” 

He was leaning with one elbow on the control panel of 
the electro-encephalograph, looking completely relaxed. 
His confident tone reassured me, and I was grateful to 
him for calling me by my first name. 

“Let’s get started.” I closed my eyes. 

A sudden panic had overwhelmed me after Snow had 
fixed the electrodes and walked over to the controls: now 
it disappeared just as suddenly. Through half-closed lids, 
I could see the red lights winking on the black control- 
panel. I was no longer aware of the damp, unpleasant 
touch of the crown of clammy electrodes. My mind was an 
empty grey arena ringed by a crowd of invisible onlookers 
massed on tiers of seats, attentive, silent, and emanating 
in their silence an ironic contempt for Sartorius and the 
Mission. What should I improvise for these spectators? 
. . . Rheya ... I introduced her name cautiously, ready to 
withdraw it at once, but no protest came, and I kept going. 
I was drunk with grief and tenderness, ready to suffer 
prolonged sacrifices patiently. My mind was pervaded 
with Rheya, without a body or a face, but alive inside me, 
real and imperceptible. Suddenly, as if printed over that 
despairing presence, I saw in the grey shadow the learned, 
professorial face of Giese, the father of Solarist studies 
and of Solarists. I was not visualizing the nauseating mud- 
eruption which had swallowed up the gold-rimmed spec- 
tacles and carefully brushed moustache. I was seeing the 


161 


engraving on the title-page of his classic work, and the 
close-hatched strokes against which the artist had made 
his head stand out — so like my father’s, that head, not in 
its features but in its expression of old-fashioned wisdom 
and honesty, that I was finally no longer able to tell which 
of them was looking at me, my father or Giese. They were 
dead, and neither of them buried, but then deaths without 
burial are not uncommon in our time. 

The image of Giese vanished, and I momentarily forgot 
the Station, the experiment, Rheya and the ocean. Recent 
memories were obliterated by the overwhelming convic- 
tion that these two men, my father and Giese, nothing but 
ashes now, had once faced up to the totality of their exist- 
ence, and this conviction afforded a profound calm which 
annihilated the formless assembly clustered around the 
grey arena in the expectation of my defeat. 

I heard the click of circuit-breakers, and light pene- 
trated my eyelids, which blinked open. Sartorius had not 
budged from his previous position, and was looking at 
me. Snow had his back turned to operate the control- 
panel. I had the impression that he was amusing himself 
by making his sandals slap on the floor. 

“Do you think that stage one has been successful, Dr. 
Kelvin?” Sartorius inquired, in the nasal voice which I had 
come to detest. 

“Yes.” 

“Are you sure?” he persisted, obviously rather sur- 
prised, and perhaps even suspicious. 

“Yes.” 

My assurance and the bluntness of my answers made 
him lose his composure briefly. 

“Oh . . . good,” he stammered. 

Snow came over to me and started to unwrap the band- 
age from my head. Sartorius stepped back, hesitated, then 
disappeared into the dark-room. 

I was rubbing the circulation back into my legs when he 
came out again, holding the developed film. Zigzag lines 
traced a lacy pattern along fifty feet of glistening black 
ribbon. My presence was no longer necessary, but I 
stayed, and Snow fed the ribbon into the modulator. Sar- 


162 


torius made a final suspicious examination of the last few 
feet of the spool, as if trying to decipher the content of the 
wavering lines. 

The experiment proceeded with a minimum of fuss. 
Snow and Sartorius each sat at a bank of controls and 
pushed buttons. Through the reinforced floor, I heard the 
whine of power building up in the turbines. Lights moved 
downward inside glass-fronted indicators in time with the 
descent of the great X-ray beamer to the bottom of its 
housing. They came to a stop at the low limit of the indica- 
tors. 

Snow stepped up the power, and the white needle of the 
voltmeter described a left-to-right semicircle. The hum of 
current was barely audible now, as the film unwound, in- 
visible behind the two round caps. Numbers clicked 
through the footage indicator. 

I went over to Rheya, who was watching us over her 
book. She glanced up at me inquiringly. The experiment 
was over, and Sartorius was walking towards the heavy 
conical head of the machine. 

“Can we go?” Rheya mouthed silently. 

I replied with a nod, Rheya stood up, and we left the 
room without taking leave of my colleagues. 

A superb sunset was blazing through the windows of 
the upper-deck corridor. Usually the horizon was reddish 
and gloomy at this hour. This time it was a shimmering 
pink, laced with silver. Under the soft glow of the light, the 
somber foothills of the ocean shone pale violet. The sky 
was red only at the zenith. 

We came to the bottom of the stairway, and I stopped, 
reluctant to wall myself up again in the prison cell of the 
cabin. 

“Rheya, I want to look something up in the library. Do 
you mind?” 

“Of course not,” she exclaimed, in a forced attempt at 
cheerfulness. “I can find myself something to read. . . ” 

I knew only too well that a gulf had opened between us 
since the previous day. I should have behaved more con- 
siderately, and tried to master my apathy, but I could not 
summon the strength. 


163 


We walked down the ramp leading to the library. There 
were three doors giving onto the little entrance hall, and 
crystal globes containing flowers were spaced out along 
the walls. I opened the middle door, which was lined with 
synthetic leather on either side. I always avoided contact 
with this upholstery when entering the library. We were 
greeted by a pleasant gust of fresh air. In spite of the 
stylized sun painted on the ceiling, the great circular hall 
had remained cool. 

Idly running a finger along the spines of the books, I 
was on the point of choosing, out of all the Solarist clas- 
sics, the first volume of Giese, so as to refresh my memory 
of the portrait on the title-page, when I came upon a book 
I had not noticed before, an octavo volume with a cracked 
binding. It was Gravinsky’s Compendium, used mostly by 
students, as a crib. 

Sitting in an armchair, with Rheya at my side, I leafed 
through Gravinsky ’s alphabetical classification of the vari- 
ous Solarist theories. The compiler, who had never set 
foot on Solaris, had combed through every monograph, 
expedition report, fragmentary outline and provisional 
account, even making excerpts of incidental comments 
about Solaris in planetological works dealing with other 
worlds. He had drawn up an inventory crammed with sim- 
plistic formulations, which grossly diminished the sub- 
tlety of the ideas it resumed. Originally intended as an 
all-embracing account, Gravinsky’s book was little more 
than a curiosity now. It had only been published twenty 
years before, but since that time such a mass of new theo- 
ries had accumulated that there would not have been 
room for them in a single volume. I glanced through the 
index — practically an obituary list, for few of the authors 
cited were still alive, and among the survivors none was 
still playing an active part in Solarist studies. Reading all 
these names, and adding up the sum of the intellectual 
efforts they represented in every field of research, it was 
tempting to think that surely one of the theories quoted 
must be correct, and that the thousands of listed hypothe- 
ses must each contain some grain of truth, could not be 
totally unrelated to the reality. 


164 


In his introduction, Gravinsky divided the first sixty 
years of Solarist studies into periods. During the initial 
period, which began with the scouting ship that studied 
the planet from orbit, nobody had produced theories in 
the strict sense. ‘Common sense’ suggested that the 
ocean was a lifeless chemical conglomerate, a gelatinous 
mass which through its ‘quasi-volcanic’ activity produced 
marvellous creations and stabilized its eccentric orbit by 
virtue of a self-generated mechanical process, as a pen- 
dulum keeps itself on a fixed path once it is set in motion. 
To be precise, Magenon had come up with the idea that 
the ‘colloidal machine’ was alive three years after the first 
expedition, but according to the Compendium the period of 
biological hypotheses does not begin until nine years 
later, when Magenon’s idea had acquired numerous sup- 
porters. The following years teemed with theoretical ac- 
counts of the living ocean, extremely complex, and 
supported by biomathematical analysis. During the third 
period, scientific opinion, hitherto practically unanimous, 
became divided. 

What followed was internecine warfare between scores 
of new schools of thought. It was the age of Panmaller, 
Strobel, Freyus, Le Greuille and Osipowicz: the entire 
legacy of Giese was submitted to a merciless examination. 
The first atlases and inventories appeared, and new tech- 
niques in remote control enabled instruments to transmit 
stereophotographs from the interior of the asymmet- 
riads, once considered impossible to explore. In the hub- 
bub of controversy, the ‘minimal’ hypotheses were 
contemptuously dismissed: even if the long-awaited con 
tact with the ‘reasoning monster’ did not materialize, it 
was argued that it was still worth investigating the car- 
tilaginous cities of the mimoids and the ballooning moun- 
tains that rose above the ocean because we would gain 
valuable chemical and physio-chemical information, and 
enlarge our understanding of the structure of giant mole- 
cules. Nobody bothered even to refute the adherents of 
this defeatist line of reasoning. Scientists devoted them- 
selves to drawing up catalogues of the typical metamor- 
phoses which are still standard works, and Frank 


165 


developed his bioplasmatic theory of the mimoids, which 
has since been shown to be inaccurate, but remains a 
superb example of intellectual audacity and logical con- 
struction. 

The thirty or so years of the first three ‘Gravinsky peri- 
ods,’ with their open assurance and irresistibly optimistic 
romanticism, constitute the infancy of Solarist studies. 
Already a growing scepticism heralded the age of 
maturity. Towards the end of the first quarter-century the 
early colloido-mechanistic theories had found a distant 
descendant in the concept of the ‘apsychic ocean,’ a new 
and almost unanimous orthodoxy which threw overboard 
the view of that entire generation of scientists who be- 
lieved that their observations were evidence of a con- 
scious will, teleological processes, and activity motivated 
by some inner need of the ocean. This point of view was 
now overwhelmingly repudiated, and the ground was 
cleared for the team headed by Holden, Ionides and 
Stoliva, whose lucid, analytically-based speculations con- 
centrated on scrupulous examination of a growing body 
of data. It was the golden age of the archivists. Microfilm 
libraries burst at the seams with documents; expeditions, 
some of them more than a thousand strong, were 
equipped with the most lavish apparatus Earth could pro- 
vide — robot recorders, sonar and radar, and the entire 
range of spectrometers, radiation counters and so on. 
Material was being accumulated at an accelerating tempo, 
but the essential spirit of the research flagged, and in the 
course of this period, still an optimistic one in spite of 
everything, a decline set in. 

The first phase of Solaristics had been shaped by the 
personality of men like Giese, Strobel and Sevada, who 
had remained adventurous whether they were asserting 
or attacking a theoretical position. Sevada, the last of the 
great Solarists, disappeared near the south pole of the 
planet, and his death was never satisfactorily explained. 
He fell victim to a mistake which not even a novice would 
have made. Flying at low altitude, in full view of scores of 
observers, his aircraft had plunged into the interior of an 
agilus which was not even directly in its path. There was 


166 


speculation about a sudden heart attack or fainting fit, or 
a mechanical failure, but I have always believed that this 
was in fact the first suicide, brought on by the first abrupt 
crisis of despair. 

There were other ‘crises,’ not mentioned in Gravinsky, 
whose details I was able to fill in out of my own knowledge 
as I stared at the yellowed, closely-printed pages. 

The later expressions of despair were in any case less 
dramatic, just as outstanding personalities became rarer. 
The recruitment of scientists to any particular field of 
study in a given age has never been studied as a phenome- 
non in its own right. Every generation throws up a fairly 
constant number of brilliant and determined men; the 
only difference lies in the direction they choose to take. 
The absence or presence of such individuals in a particu- 
lar field of study is probably explicable in terms of the new 
perspectives offered. Opinions may differ about the re- 
searchers of the classical age of Solarist studies, but no- 
body can deny their stature, even their genius. For several 
decades, the mysterious ocean had attracted the best 
mathematicians and physicists, and the top specialists in 
biophysics, information theory and electro-physiology. 
Now, without warning, the army of researchers found it- 
self leaderless. There remained a faceless mass of indus- 
trious collectors and compilers. The occasional original 
experiment might be devised, but the succession of vast 
expeditions mounted on a worldwide scale petered out, 
and the scientific world no longer echoed with ambitious, 
controversial theories. 

The machinery of Solaristics fell into disrepair, and 
rusted over with hypotheses differentiated only in minor 
details, and unanimous in their concentration on the 
theme of the ocean’s degeneration, regression and intro- 
version. Now and then a bolder, more interesting concept 
might emerge, but it always amounted to a kind of indict- 
ment of the ocean, viewed as the end-product of a devel- 
opment which long ago, thousands of years before, had 
gone through a phase of superior organization, and now 
had nothing more than a physical unity. The argument 
went that its many useless, absurd creations were its 


167 


death-throes— impressive enough, nonetheless— which 
had been going on for centuries. Thus, for instance, the 
extensors and mimoids were seen as tumors, and all the 
surface processes of the huge fluid body as expressions 
of chaos and anarchy. This approach to the problem be- 
came an obsession. For seven or eight years, the academic 
literature produced a spate of assertions which although 
framed in polite, cautious terms, amounted to little more 
than insults, the revenge of a rabble of leaderless suitors 
when they realized that the object of their most pressing 
attentions was indifferent to the point of obstinately ig- 
noring all their advances. 

A group of European psychologists once carried out a 
public opinion poll spread over a period of several years. 
Their report had no direct bearing on Solarist studies, 
and was not included in the library collection, but I had 
read it, and retained a clear memory of its findings. The 
investigators had strikingly demonstrated that the 
changes in lay opinion were closely correlated to the fluc- 
tuations of opinion recorded in scientific circles. 

That change was expressed even in the coordinating 
committee of the Institute of Planetology, which controls 
the financial appropriations for research, by means of a 
progressive reduction in the budgets of institutes and 
appointments devoted to Solarist studies, as well as by 
restrictions on the size of the exploration teams. 

Some scientists adopted a position at the other ex- 
treme, and agitated for more vigorous steps to be taken. 
The administrative director of the Universal Cosmologi- 
cal Institute ventured to assert that the living ocean did 
not despise men in the least, but had not noticed them, as 
an elephant neither feels nor sees the ants crawling on its 
back. To attract and hold the ocean’s attention, it would 
be necessary to devise more powerful stimuli, and gigan- 
tic machines tailored to the dimensions of the entire 
planet. Malicious commentators were not slow to point 
out that the director could well afford to be generous, 
since it was the Institute of Planetology which would have 
had to foot the bill. 

Still the hypotheses rained down— old, ‘resurrected’ 


168 


hypotheses, superficially modified, simplified, or com- 
plicated to the extreme — and Solaristics, a relatively well- 
defined discipline in spite of its scope, became an 
increasingly tangled maze where every apparent exit led 
to a dead end. In the climate of general indifference, stag- 
nation and despondency, the ocean of Solaris was sub- 
merging under an ocean of printed paper. 

Two years before I began the stint in Gibarian’s labora- 
tory which ended when I obtained the diploma of the 
Institute, the Mett-Irving Foundation offered a huge prize 
to anybody who could find a viable method of tapping the 
energy of the ocean. The idea was not a new one. Several 
cargoes of the plasmatic jelly had been shipped back to 
Earth in the past, and various methods of preservation 
had been patiently tested: high and low temperatures, 
artificial micro-atmospheres and micro-climates, and 
prolonged irradiation. The whole gamut of physical and 
chemical processes had been run, only to end with the 
same outcome, a gradual process of decomposition which 
passed through well-defined stages, starting with wasting, 
maceration, then first-degree (primary) and late (second- 
ary) liquefaction. The samples removed from the plas- 
matic growths and creations met with the same fate, with 
certain variations in the phases of decomposition. The 
end-product was always a light metallic ash. 

Once the scientists recognized that it was impossible to 
keep alive, or even in a ‘vegetative’ state, any fragment of 
the ocean, large or small, in dissociation from the entire 
organism, a growing tendency developed (under the in- 
fluence of the Meunier-Proroch school) to isolate this 
problem as the key to the mystery. It was seen as a matter 
of interpretation — solve it, and the back of the problem 
would be broken. 

The quest for this key, the philosopher’s stone of Sola- 
rist studies, had absorbed the time and energy of all kinds 
of people with little or no scientific training. During the 
fourth decade of Solaristics the craze spread like an epi- 
demic, and provided a fertile ground for the psycholo- 
gists. An unknown number of cranks and ignorant 
fanatics toiled at their fumbling researches with a greater 


169 


enthusiasm than any which had animated the old prophets 
of perpetual motion, or the squaring of the circle. The 
craze fizzled out in only a few years, and by the time I was 
ready to leave for Solaris it had vanished from the head- 
lines and from conversation, and the ocean itself was 
practically forgotten by the public. 

I took care to replace the Compendium in its correct 
alphabetical position, and in doing so dislodged a slim 
pamphlet by Grastrom, one of the most eccentric authors 
in Solarist literature. I had read the pamphlet, which was 
dictated by the urge to understand what lies beyond the 
grasp of mankind, and aimed in particular against the 
individual, man, and the human species. It was the ab- 
stract, acidulous work of an autodidact who had previ- 
ously made a series of unusual contributions to various 
marginal and rarefied branches of quantum physics. In 
this fifteen-page booklet (his magnum opus!), Grastrom 
set out to demonstrate that the most abstract achieve- 
ments of science, the most advanced theories and victo- 
ries of mathematics represented nothing more than a 
stumbling, one or two-step progression from our rude, 
prehistoric, anthropomorphic understanding of the uni- 
verse around us. He pointed out correspondences with 
the human body — the projections of our senses, the struc- 
ture of our physical organization, and the physiological 
limitations of man — in the equations of the theory of 
relativity, the theorem of magnetic fields and the various 
unified field theories. Grastrom’s conclusion was that 
there neither was, nor could be, any question of ‘contact’ 
between mankind and any nonhuman civilization. This 
broadside against humanity made no specific mention of 
the living ocean, but its constant presence and scornful, 
victorious silence could be felt between every line, at any 
rate such had been my own impression. It was Gibarian 
who drew it to my attention, and it must have been 
Gibarian who had added it to the Station’s collection, on 
his own authority, since Grastrom’s pamphlet was re- 
garded more as a curiosity than a true contribution to 
Solarist literature. 

With a strange feeling almost of respect, I carefully slid 


170 


the slim pamphlet back into the crowded bookshelf, then 
stroked the green bronze binding of the Solaris Annual 
with my fingertips. In the space of a few days, we had 
unquestionably gained positive information about a num- 
ber of basic questions, which had made seas of ink flow 
and fed innumerable controversies, yet had remained 
sterile for lack of arguments. Today the mystery practi- 
cally had us under siege, and we had powerful arguments. 

Was the ocean a living creature? It could hardly be 
doubted any longer by any but lovers of paradox or ob- 
stinacy. It was no longer possible to deny the ‘psychic’ 
functions of the ocean, no matter how that term might be 
defined. Certainly it was only too obvious that the ocean 
had ‘noticed’ us. This fact alone invalidated that category 
of Solarist theories which claimed that the ocean was an 
‘introverted’ world, a ‘hermit entity,’ deprived by a pro- 
cess of degeneration of the thinking organs it once pos- 
sessed, unaware of the existence of external objects and 
events, the prisoner of a gigantic vortex of mental cur- 
rents created and confined in the depths of this monster 
revolving between two suns. 

Not only that, we had discovered that the ocean was 
capable of reproducing what we ourselves had never suc- 
ceeded in creating artifically — a perfect human body, 
modified in its sub-atomic structure for purposes we 
could not guess. 

The ocean lived, thought and acted. The ‘Solaris prob- 
lem’ had not been annihilated by its very absurdity. We 
were truly dealing with a living creature. The ‘lost’ faculty 
was not lost at all. All this now seemed proved beyond 
doubt. Like it or not, men must pay attention to this 
neighbor, light years away, but nevertheless a neighbor 
situated inside our sphere of expansion, and more disqui- 
eting than all the rest of the universe. 

Perhaps we had arrived at a turning-point. What would 
the high-level decision be? Would we be ordered to give 
up and return to Earth, immediately or in the near future? 
Was it even possible that we would be ordered to liquidate 
the Station? It was at least not improbable. But I did not 
favor the solution by retreat. The existence of the thinking 


171 


colossus was bound to go on haunting men’s minds. Even 
when man had explored every corner of the cosmos, and 
established relations with other civilizations founded by 
creatures similar to ourselves, Solaris would remain an 
eternal challenge. 

Misplaced among the thick volumes of the Annual, I 
discovered a small calf-bound book, and scanned its 
scuffed, worn cover for a moment. It was Muntius’s Intro- 
duction to Solaristics, published many years before. I had 
read it in a single night, after Gibarian had smilingly lent 
me his personal copy; and when I had turned the final 
page the light of a new Earth dawn was shining through 
my window. According to Muntius, Solaristics is the space 
era’s equivalent of religion: faith disguised as science. 
Contact, the stated aim of Solaristics, is no less vague and 
obscure than the communion of the saints, or the second 
coming of the Messiah. Exploration is a liturgy using the 
language of methodology; the drudgery of the Solarists is 
carried out only in the expectation of fulfillment, of an 
Annunciation, for there are not and cannot be any bridges 
between Solaris and Earth. The comparison is reinforced 
by obvious parallels: Solarists reject arguments — no ex- 
periences in common, no communicable notions— just as 
the faithful rejected the arguments that undermined the 
foundations of their belief. Then again, what can mankind 
expect or hope for out of a joint ‘pooling of information’ 
with the living ocean? A catalogue of the vicissitudes as- 
sociated with an existence of such infinite duration that it 
probably has no memory of its origins? A description of 
the aspirations, passions and sufferings that find expres- 
sion in the perpetual creation of living mountains? The 
apotheosis of mathematics, the revelation of plenitude in 
isolation and renunciation? But all this represents a body 
of incommunicable knowledge. Transposed into any hu- 
man language, the values and meanings involved lose all 
substance; they cannot be brought intact through the bar- 
rier. In any case, the ‘adepts’ do not expect such revela- 
tions — of the order of poetry, rather than science — since 
unconsciously it is Revelation itself that they expect, and 
this revelation is to explain to them the meaning of the 


172 


destiny of man! Solaristics is a revival of long-vanished 
myths, the expression of mystical nostalgias which men 
are unwilling to confess openly. The cornerstone is 
deeply entrenched in the foundations of the edifice: it is 
the hope of Redemption. 

Solarists are incapable of recognizing this truth, and 
consequently take care to avoid any interpretation of Con- 
tact, which is presented in their writings as an ultimate 
goal, whereas originally it had been considered as a be- 
ginning, and as a step onto a new path, among many other 
possible paths. Over the years, Contact has become sanc- 
tified. It has become the heaven of eternity. 

Muntius analyzes this ‘heresy’ of planetology very sim- 
ply and trenchantly. He brilliantly dismantles the Solarist 
myth, or rather the myth of the Mission of Mankind. 

Muntius’s had been the first voice raised in protest, and 
had encountered the contemptuous silence of the experts, 
at a time when they still retained a romantic confidence in 
the development of Solaristics. After all, how could they 
have accepted a thesis that struck at the foundations of 
their achievements? 

Solaristics went on waiting for the man who would rees- 
tablish it on a firm foundation and define its frontiers with 
precision. Five years after the death of Muntius, when his 
pamphlet had become a rare collectors’ piece, a group of 
Norwegian researchers founded a school named after 
him. In contact with the personalities of his various 
spiritual heirs, the quiet thought of the master went 
through profound transformations; it led to the corrosive 
irony of Erie Ennesson and, on a more mundane plane, 
the ‘utilitarian’ or ‘utilitarianistic’ Solaristics of Fa-leng, 
who argued that science should settle for the immediate 
advantages offered by exploration, and not concern itself 
with any intellectual communion of two civilizations, or 
some illusory contact. Compared with the ruthless, lucid 
analysis of Muntius, the works of his disciples are hardly 
more than compilations and sometimes vulgarizations, 
with the exception of Ennesson’s essays and perhaps the 
studies of Takata. Muntius himself had already defined 
the complete development of Solarist concepts. He called 


173 


the first phase the era of the ‘prophets,’ among whom he 
included Giese, Holden and Sevada; the second, the 
‘great schism’ — the fragmentation of the one Solarist 
church into a number of warring sects; and he anticipated 
a third phase, which would set in when there was nothing 
left to investigate, and manifest itself in a crabbed, aca- 
demic dogmatism. This prophecy was to prove inaccu- 
rate, however. In my opinion, Gibarian was right to 
characterize Muntius’s strictures as a monumental sim- 
plification which ignored all the aspects of Solarist studies 
that had nothing in common with a creed, since the work 
of interpretation based itself only on the concrete evi- 
dence of a globe orbiting two suns. 

Slipped between two pages of Muntius’s pamphlet, I 
discovered an off-print of the quarterly review Parerga 
Solariana, which turned out to be one of the first articles 
written by Gibarian, even before he was appointed direc- 
tor of the Institute. The article was called “Why I am a 
Solarist” and began with a concise account of all the 
material phenomena which confirmed the possibility of 
contact. Gibarian belonged to that generation of re- 
searchers who had been daring and optimistic enough to 
hark back to the golden age, and who did not disown their 
own version of a faith that overstepped the frontiers im- 
posed by science, and yet remained concrete, since it pre- 
supposed the success of perseverance. 

Gibarian had been influenced by the classical work in 
bio-electronics for which the Eurasian school of Cho En- 
min, Ngyalla and Kawakadze is famous. Their studies es- 
tablished an analogy between the charted electrical 
activity of the brain and certain discharges occurring 
deep in the plasma before the appearance, for example, 
of elementary polymorphs or twin solarids. Gibarian was 
opposed to anthropomorphizing interpretations, and the 
mystifications of the psychoanalytic, psychiatric and 
neurophysiological schools which attempted to endow the 
ocean with the symptoms of human illnesses, epilepsy 
among them (supposed to correspond with the spas- 
modic eruptions of the asymmetriads). He was one of the 
most cautious and logical proponents of Contact, and saw 


174 


no advantage in the kind of sensationalism which was in 
any case becoming more and more rare as applied to 
Solaris. 

My own doctoral thesis received a fair amount of atten- 
tion, not all of it welcome. It was based on the discoveries 
of Bergmann and Reynolds, who had succeeded in isolat- 
ing and ‘filtering’ the elements of the most powerful emo- 
tions — despair, grief and pleasure — out of the mass of 
general mental processes. Systematically comparing their 
recordings with the electrical discharges from the ocean, 
I had observed oscillations in certain parts of symmet- 
riads and at the bases of nascent mimoids which were 
sufficiently analogous to deserve further investigation. 
The journalists pounced on my thesis, and in some news- 
papers my name was coupled with grotesque headlines — 
‘The Despairing Jelly,’ ‘The Planet in Orgasm.’ But this 
dubious fame did have the fortunate consequence (or so 
I had thought a few days previously) of attracting the 
attention of Gibarian, who naturally could not read every 
new publication dealing with Solaris. The letter he sent 
me ended a chapter of my life, and began a new one . . . 


175 


The Dreams 


When six days passed with no reaction from the ocean, we 
decided to repeat the experiment. Until now, the Station 
had been located at the intersection of the forty-third 
parallel and the 116th meridian. We moved south, main- 
taining a constant altitude of 1200 feet above the ocean — 
our radar confirmed automatic observations relayed by 
the artificial satellite which indicated a build-up of activity 
in the plasma of the southern hemisphere. 

Forty-eight hours later, a beam of X-rays modulated by 
my own brain-patterns was bombarding the almost mo- 
tionless surface of the ocean at regular intervals. 

At the end of this two-day journey we had reached the 
outskirts of the polar region. The disc of the blue sun was 
setting to one side of the horizon, while on the opposite 
side billowing purple clouds announced the dawn of the 
red sun. In the sky, blinding flames and showers of green 
sparks clashed with the dull purple glow. Even the ocean 
participated in the battle between the two stars, here glit- 
tering with mercurial flashes, there with crimson reflec- 
tions. The smallest cloud passing overhead brightened 
the shining foam on the wave-crests with iridescence. The 
blue sun had barely set when, at the meeting of ocean and 
sky, indistinct and drowned in blood-red mist (but sig- 
nalled immediately by the detectors), a symmetriad blos- 


176 


somed like a gigantic crystal flower. The Station held its 
course, and after fifteen minutes the colossal ruby throb- 
bing with dying gleams was once again hidden beneath 
the horizon. Some minutes later, a thin column spouted 
thousands of yards upwards into the atmosphere, its base 
obscured from view by the curvature of the planet. This 
fantastic tree, which went on growing and gushing blood 
and quicksilver, marked the end of the symmetriad: the 
tangled branches at the top of the column melted into a 
huge mushroom shape, illuminated by both suns simul- 
taneously, and carried on the wind, while the lower part 
bulged, broke up into heavy clusters, and slowly sank. The 
death-throes lasted well over an hour. 

Another two days passed. Our X-rays had irradiated a 
vast stretch of the ocean, and we made a final repetition 
of the experiment. From our observation post we spotted 
a chain of islets two hundred and fifty miles to the south 
— six rocky promontories encrusted with a snowy sub- 
stance which was in fact a deposit of organic origin, prov- 
ing that the mountainous formation had once been part 
of the ocean bed. 

We then moved south-west, and skirted a chain of 
mountains capped by clouds which gathered during the 
red day, and then disappeared. Ten days had elapsed 
since the first experiment. 

On the surface, not much was happening in the Station. 
Sartorius had programmed the experiment for automatic 
repetition at set intervals. I did not even know whether 
anybody was checking the apparatus for correct function. 
In fact, the calm was not as complete as it seemed, but not 
because of any human activity. 

I was afraid that Sartorius had no real intention of aban- 
doning the construction of the disruptor. And how would 
Snow react when he found out that I had kept information 
from him and exaggerated the dangers we might run in 
the attempt to annihilate neutrino structures? Yet neither 
of the two said anything further about the project, and I 
kept wondering why they were so silent. I vaguely sus- 
pected them of keeping something from me — perhaps 
they had been working in secret — and every day I in- 


177 


spected the room which housed the disruptor, a window- 
less cell situated directly underneath the main laboratory. 
I never found anybody in the room, and the layer of dust 
over the armatures and cables of the apparatus proved 
that it had not been touched for weeks. 

As a matter of fact, I did not meet anybody anywhere, 
and could not get through to Snow any more: nobody 
answered when I tried to call the radio cabin. Somebody 
had to be controlling the Station’s movements, but who? 
I had no idea, and oddly enough I considered the question 
was out of my province. The absence of response from 
the ocean left me equally indifferent, so much so that after 
two or three days I had stopped being either hopeful or 
apprehensive, and had completely written off the experi- 
ment and its possible results. 

For days on end, I remained sitting in the library or in 
my cabin, accompanied by the silent shadow of Rheya. I 
was aware that there was an unease between us, and that 
my state ot mindless suspension could not go on for ever. 
Obviously it was up to me to break the stalemate, but I 
resisted the very idea of any kind of change: I was incapa- 
ble of making the most trivial decision. Everything inside 
the Station, and my relationship with Rheya in particular, 
felt fragile and insubstantial, as if the slightest alteration 
could shatter the perilous equilibrium and bring down 
ruin. I could not tell where this feeling originated, and the 
strangest thing of all is that Rheya too had a similar expe- 
rience. When I look back on those moments today, I have 
a strong conviction that this atmosphere of uncertainty 
and suspense, and my presentiment of impending disas- 
ter, was provoked by an invisible presence which had 
taken possession of the Station. I believe too that I can 
claim that this presence manifested itself just as power- 
fully in dreams. I have never had visions of that kind 
before or since, so I decided to note them down and to 
transcribe them approximately, in so far as my vocabulary 
permits, given that I can convey only fragmentary 
glimpses almost entirely denuded of an incommunicable 
horror. 

A blurred region, in the heart of vastness, far from 


178 


earth and heaven, with no ground underfoot, no vault of 
sky overhead, nothing. I am the prisoner of an alien mat- 
ter and my body is clothed in a dead, formless substance 
— or rather I have no body, I am that alien matter. Nebu- 
lous pale pink globules surround me, suspended in a 
medium more opaque than air, for objects only become 
clear at very close range, although when they do approach 
they are abnormally distinct, and their presence comes 
home to me with a preternatural vividness. The convic- 
tion of its substantial, tangible reality is now so over- 
whelming that later, when I wake up, I have the impression 
that I have just left a state of true perception, and every- 
thing I see after opening my eyes seems hazy and unreal. 

That is how the dream begins. All around me, some- 
thing is awaiting my consent, my inner acquiescence, and 
I know, or rather the knowledge exists, that I must not 
give \yay to an unknown temptation, for the more the 
silence seems to promise, the more terrible the outcome 
will be. Yet I essentially know no such thing, because I 
would be afraid if I knew, and I never felt the slightest fear. 

I wait. Out of the enveloping pink mist, an invisible 
object emerges, and touches me. Inert, locked in the alien 
matter that encloses me, I can neither retreat nor turn 
away, and still I am being touched, my prison is being 
probed, and I feel this contact like a hand, and the hand 
recreates me. Until now, I thought I saw, but had no eyes: 
now I have eyes! Under the caress of the hesitant fingers, 
my lips and cheeks emerge from the void, and as the 
caress goes further I have a face, breath stirs in my chest 
— I exist. And recreated, I in my turn create: a face ap- 
pears before me that I have never seen until now, at once 
mysterious and known. I strain to meet its gaze, but I 
cannot impose any direction on my own, and we discover 
one another mutually, beyond any effort of will, in an 
absorbed silence. I have become alive again, and I feel as 
if there is no limitation on my powers. This creature — a 
woman? — stays near me, and we are motionless. The beat 
of our hearts combines, and all at once, out of the sur- 
rounding void where nothing exists or can exist, steals a 
presence of indefinable, unimaginable cruelty. The caress 


179 


that created us and which wrapped us in a golden cloak 
becomes the crawling of innumerable fingers. Our white, 
naked bodies dissolve into a swarm of black creeping 
things, and I am — we are — a mass of glutinous coiling 
worms, endless, and in that infinity, no, I am infinite, and 
I howl soundlessly, begging for death and for an end. But 
simultaneously I am dispersed in all directions, and my 
grief expands in a suffering more acute than any waking 
state, a pervasive, scattered pain piercing the distant 
blacks and reds, hard as rock and ever-increasing, a 
mountain of grief visible in the dazzling light of another 
world. 

That dream was one of the simplest. I cannot describe 
the others, for lack of a language to convey their dread. 
In those dreams, I was unaware of the existence of Rheya, 
nor was there any echo of past or recent events. 

There were also visionless dreams, where in an unmov- 
ing, clotted silence I felt myself being slowly and minutely 
explored, although no instrument or hand touched me. 
Yet I felt myself being invaded through and through, I 
crumbled, disintegrated, and only emptiness remained. 
Total annihilation was succeeded by such terror that its 
memory alone makes my heart beat faster today. 

So the days passed, each one like the next. I was indiff- 
erent to everything, fearing only the night and unable to 
find a means of escape from the dreams. Rheya never 
slept. I lay beside her, fighting against sleep, and the ten- 
derness with which I clung to her was only a pretext, a way 
of avoiding the moment when I would be compelled to 
close my eyes. I had not mentioned these nightmares to 
her, but she must have guessed, for her attitude involun- 
tarily betrayed a sense of deep humiliation. 

As I say, I had not seen Snow or Sartorius for some 
time, yet Snow gave occasional signs of life. He would 
leave a note at my door, or call me on the videophone, 
asking whether I had noticed any new event or change, or 
anything at all which could be interpreted as a response 
to the repeated X-ray bombardments. I told him No, and 
asked him the same question, but there in the little screen 
Snow only shook his head. 


180 



On the fifteenth day after the conclusion of the experi- 
ment, I woke up earlier than usual, exhausted by the previ- 
ous night’s dreams. All my limbs were numbed, as if 
emerging from the effects of a powerful narcotic. The first 
rays of the red sun shone through the window, a blanket 
of red flame rippled over the surface of the ocean, and I 
realized that the vast expanse which had not been dis- 
turbed by the slightest movement in the past four days 
was beginning to stir. The dark ocean was abruptly cov- 
ered by a thin veil of mist which seemed at the same time 
to have a very palpable consistency. Here and there the 
mist shook, and tremors spread out to the horizon in all 
directions. Now the ocean disappeared altogether 
beneath thick, corrugated membranes with pink swellings 
and pearly depressions, and these strange waves sus- 
pended above the ocean swirled suddenly and coalesced 
into great balls of blue-green foam. A tempest of wind 
hurled them upwards to the height of the Station, and 
wherever I looked, immense membranous wings were 
soaring in the red sky. Some of these wings of foam, 
which blotted out the sun, were pitch-black, and others 
shone with highlights of purple as they were exposed 
obliquely to the sunlight. Still the phenomenon con- 
tinued, as if the ocean were mutating, or shedding an old 
scaly skin. Now and again the dark surface of the ocean 
could be glimpsed through a gap that the foam filled in an 
instant. Wings of foam planed all around me, only a few 
yards from the window, and one swooped to rub against 
the window pane like a silken scarf. As the ocean went on 
giving birth to these fantastic birds, the first flights were 
already dissipating high above, decomposing at their 
zenith into transparent filaments. 

The Station remained motionless as long as the spec- 
tacle lasted — about three hours, until night intervened. 
And even after the sun had set and the shadows had 
spread over the ocean, the lurid glow of myriads of wings 
could still be discerned rising into the sky, hovering in 
massed ranks, and climbing effortlessly towards the light. 

This performance had terrified Rheya, but it was no less 
disconcerting for me, although its novelty ought not to 


181 


have been disturbing, since two or three times a year, and 
oftener when luck smiled on them, Solarists observed 
forms and creations never previously recorded. 

The following night, an hour before the blue sunrise, 
we witnessed another effect: the ocean was becoming 
phosphorescent. Pools of grey light were rising and fall- 
ing to the rhythm of invisible waves. Isolated at first, these 
gray patches quickly spread and joined together, and 
soon made up a carpet of spectral light extending as far 
as the eye could see. The intensity of the light grew 
progressively for some fifteen to twenty minutes, then the 
phenomenon came to a surprising end. A pall of shadow 
approached from the west, stretching along a front sev- 
eral hundred miles wide. When this moving shadow had 
overtaken the Station, the phosphorescent part of the 
ocean, retreating eastward, seemed to be trying to escape 
from the vast extinguisher. It was like an aurora put to 
flight, and retreating as far as the horizon, which was 
edged by a fading glow before the darkness conquered. 
Shortly afterwards, the sun rose above the ocean wastes, 
which were furrowed by a few solidified waves, whose 
mercurial reflections played on my window. 

The phosphorescence was a recorded effect, some- 
times observed before the eruption of an asymmetriad, 
but always indicative of a local increase in the activity of 
the plasma. Nevertheless, in the course of the next two 
weeks nothing happened either inside or outside the Sta- 
tion, except on one occasion when in the middle of the 
night I heard the sound of a piercing scream which came 
from no human throat. The shrill, protracted howling 
woke me out of a nightmare, and at first I thought that it 
was the beginning of another. Before falling asleep, I had 
heard dull noises coming from the direction of the labora- 
tory, part of which lay directly over my cabin. It sounded 
like heavy objects and machinery being shifted. When I 
realized that I was not dreaming, I decided that the 
scream also came from above, but could not understand 
how it managed to penetrate the sound-proof ceiling. The 
terrible sounds went on for almost half an hour, until my 
nerves jangled and I was pouring with sweat. I was about 


182 



to go up and investigate when the screaming stopped, to 
be replaced by more muffled sounds as of objects being 
dragged across the floor. 

Rheya and I were sitting in the kitchen two days later 
when Snow came in. He was dressed as people dress on 
Earth after their day’s work, and looked like a different 
person, taller and older. He did not look at us, or pull up 
a chair, but stood at the table, opened a can of meat and 
began cramming it down between mouthfuls of bread. 
His jacket sleeve brushed against the greasy top of the 
can. 

“Look out. Snow, your sleeve!” 

“What?” he grunted, then went on stuffing himself with 
food as if he had not eaten for days. He poured out a glass 
of wine, drank it at a gulp, sighed, and wiped his lips. Then 
he looked at me with bloodshot eyes, and mumbled: 

“So you’ve stopped shaving? Ah . . .” 

Rheya cleared the table. Snow swayed on his heels, then 
pulled a face and sucked his teeth noisily, deliberately 
exaggerating the action. He stared at me insistently: 

“So you’ve decided not to shave?” I made no reply. 
“Believe me,” he went on, “you’re making a mistake. That 
was how it started with him to . . 

“Go and lie down.” 

“What? Just when I feel like talking? Listen, Kelvin, 
perhaps it wishes well . . . perhaps it wants to please us but 
doesn’t quite know how to set about the job. It spies out 
desires in our brains, and only two per cent of mental 
processes are conscious. That means it knows us better 
than we know ourselves. We’ve got to reach an under- 
standing with it. Are you listening? Don’t you want to? 
Why?“ — he was sobbing by now — “why don’t you shave?” 

“Shut up! . . . you’re drunk.” 

“Me, drunk? And what if I am?Just because I drift about 
from one end of space to another and poke my nose into 
the cosmos, does that mean I’m not allowed to get drunk? 
Why not? You believe in the mission of mankind, don’t 
you Kelvin? Gibarian told me about you before he started 
letting his beard grow ... It was a very good description. 
Just don’t go to the lab, if you don’t want to lose your faith. 


183 


It belongs to Sartorius — Faust in reverse . . . he’s looking 
for a cure for immortality! He is the last knight of the Holy 
Contact, the man we need. His latest discovery is pretty 
good too . . . prolonged dying. Not bad, eh? Agonia per- 
petua ... of the straw ... the straw hats . . . and still you 
don’t drink, Kelvin?” 

He raised his swollen eyelids and looked at Rheya, who 
was standing quite still with her back to the wall. Then he 
began chanting: 

“O fair Aphrodite, child of Ocean, your divine hand 
. . .” He choked with laughter. “It fits, eh, Kel . . . vin . . .” 

He broke off in a fit of coughing. 

“Shut up! Shut up and get out!” I grated through 
clenched teeth. 

“You’re chucking me out? You too? You don’t shave 
and you chuck me out? What about my warnings, and my 
advice? Interstellar colleagues ought to help each other! 
Listen Kelvin, let’s go down and open the traps and call 
out. It might hear us. But what’s its name? We have named 
all the stars and all the planets, even though they might 
already have had names of their own. What a nerve! Come 
on, let’s go down. We’ll shout it such a description of the 
trick it’s played us that it will be touched. It will make us 
silver symmetriads, pray to us in calculus, send us its 
blood-stained angels. It will share our troubles and ter- 
rors, and beg us to help it die. It is already begging us, 
imploring us. It implores us to help it die with every one 
of its creations. You’re not amused . . . but you know I’m 
just a joker. If man had more of a sense of humor, things 
might have turned out differently. Do you know what he 
wants to do? He wants to punish this ocean, hear it 
screaming out of all its mountains at once. If you think 
he’ll never have the nerve to submit his plan to that bunch 
of doddering ancients who sent us here to redeem sins we 
haven’t committed, you’re right— he is afraid. But he is 
only afraid of the little hat. He won’t let anybody see the 
little hat, he won’t dare, not Faust . . .” 

I said nothing. Snow’s swaying increased. Tears were 
streaming down his cheeks and onto his clothes. He went 
on: 


184 



“Who is responsible? Who is responsible for this situa- 
tion? Gibarian? Giese? Einstein? Plato? All criminals . . . 
Just you think, in a rocket a man takes the risk of bursting 
like a balloon, or freezing, or roasting, or sweating all his 
blood out in a single gush, before he can even cry out, and 
all that remains is bits of bone floating inside armored 
hulls, in accordance with the laws of Newton as corrected 
by Einstein, those two milestones in our progress. Down 
the road we go, all in good faith, and see where it gets us. 
Think about our success Kelvin; think about our cabins, 
the unbreakable plates, the immortal sinks, legions of 
faithful wardrobes, devoted cupboards ... I wouldn’t be 
talking this way if I weren’t drunk, but sooner or later 
somebody was bound to say it, weren’t they? You sit there 
like a baby in a slaughterhouse, and you let your beard 
grow . . . Who’s to blame? Find out for yourself.” 

He turned slowly and went out, putting an arm out 
against the doorpost to steady himself. Then his footsteps 
died away along the corridor. 

I tried not to look at Rheya, but my eyes were drawn to 
hers in spite of myself. I wanted to get up, take her in my 
arms and stroke her hair. I did not move. 


185 


Victory 


Another three weeks. The shutters rose and fell on time. 
I was still a prisoner in my nightmares, and every morning 
the play began again. But was it a play? I put on a feigned 
composure, and Rheya played the same game. The decep- 
tion was mutual and deliberate, and our agreement only 
contributed to our ultimate evasion. We talked about the 
future, and our life on Earth on the outskirts of some 
great city. We would spend the rest of our lives among 
green trees and under a blue sky, and never leave Earth 
again. Together we planned the lay-out of our house and 
garden and argued over details like the location of a 
hedge or a bench. 

I do not believe that I was sincere for a single instant. 
Our plans were impossible, and I knew it, for even if 
Rheya could leave the Station and survive the voyage, how 
could I have got through the immigration checks with my 
clandestine passenger? Earth admits only human beings, 
and even then only when they carry the necessary papers. 
Rheya would be detained for an identity check at the first 
barrier, we would be separated, and she would give her- 
self away at once. The Station was the one place where we 
could live together. Rheya must have known that, or found 
it out. 

One night I heard Rheya get out of bed silently. I 


186 



wanted to stop her; in the darkness and silence we occa- 
sionally managed to throw off our despair for a while by 
making each other forget. Rheya did not notice that I had 
woken up. When I stretched my hand out, she was already 
out of bed, and walking bare-foot towards the door. With- 
out daring to raise my voice, I whispered her name, but 
she was outside, and a narrow shaft of light shone through 
the doorway from the corridor. 

There was a sound of whispering. Rheya was talking to 
somebody . . . but who? Panic overtook me when I tried 
to stand up, and my legs would not move. I listened, but 
heard nothing. The blood hammered through my tem- 
ples. I started counting, and was approaching a thousand 
when there was a movement in the doorway and Rheya 
returned. She stood there for a second without moving, 
and I made myself breathe evenly. 

“Kris?” she whispered. 

I did not answer. 

She slid quickly into bed and lay down, taking care not 
to disturb me. Questions buzzed in my mind, but I would 
not let myself be the first to speak, and made no move. 
The silent questioning went on for an hour, maybe more. 
Then I fell asleep. 

The morning was like any other. I watched Rheya fur- 
tively, but could not see any change in her behavior. After 
breakfast, we sat at the big panoramic window. The Sta- 
tion was hovering among purple clouds. Rheya was read- 
ing, and as I stared out I suddenly noticed that by holding 
my head at a certain angle I could see us both reflected in 
the window. I took my hand off the rail. Rheya had no idea 
that I was watching her. She glanced at me, obviously 
decided from my posture that I was looking at the ocean, 
then bent to kiss the place where my hand had rested. In 
a moment she was reading her book again. 

“Rheya,” I asked gently, “where did you go last night?” 

“Last night?” 

“Yes.” 

“You . . . you must have been dreaming, Kris. I didn’t 
go anywhere.” 

“You didn’t leave the cabin?” 


187 


“No. It must have been a dream.” 

“Perhaps . . . yes, perhaps I dreamt it.” 

The same evening, I started talking about our return to 
Earth again, but Rheya stopped me: 

“Don’t talk to me about the journey again, Kris. I don’t 
want to hear any more about it, you know very well . . .” 

“What?” 

“No, nothing.” 

After we went to bed, she said that she was thirsty: 

“There’s a glass of fruit-juice on the table over there. 
Could you give it to me?” She drank half of it then handed 
it to me. 

“I’m not thirsty.” 

“Drink to my health then,” she smiled. 

It tasted slightly bitter, but my mind was on other 
things. She switched the light off. 

“Rheya ... If you won’t talk about the voyage, let’s talk 
about something else.” 

“If I did not exist, would you marry?” 

“No.” 

“Never?” 

‘Never.” 

“Why not?” 

“I don’t know. I was by myself for ten years and I didn’t 
marry again. Let’s not talk about that . . My head was 
spinning as if I had been drinking too much. 

“No, let’s talk about it. What if I begged you to?” 

“To marry again? Don’t be silly, Rheya. I don’t need 
anybody except you.” 

I felt her breath on my face and her arms holding me: 

“Say it another way.” 

“I love you.” 

Her head fell to my shoulder, and I felt tears. 

“Rheya, what’s the matter?” 

“Nothing . . . nothing . . . nothing . . Her voice echoed 
into silence, and my eyes closed. 

The red dawn woke me with a splitting head and a neck 
so stiff that I felt as if the bones were welded together. My 
tongue was swollen, and my mouth felt foul. Then I 
reached out for Rheya, and my hand touched a cold sheet. 


188 



I sat up with a start. 

I was alone — alone in bed and in the cabin. The concave 
window reflected a row of red suns. I dragged myself out 
of bed and staggered over to the bathroom, reeling like 
a drunkard and propping myself up on the furniture. It 
was empty. So was the workshop. 

“Rheya!” 

Calling, running up and down the corridor. 

“Rheya!” I screamed, one last time, then my voice gave 
out. I already knew the truth . . . 

I do not remember the exact sequence of events after 
that, as I stumbled half naked through all the length and 
breadth of the Station. It seems to me that I even went into 
the refrigeration section, searched through the storage 
rooms, hammered with my fists on bolted doors then 
came back again to throw myself against doors which had 
already resisted me. I half-fell down flights of steps, 
picked myself up and hurried onwards. When I reached 
the double armoured doors which opened onto the ocean 
I was still calling, still hoping that it was a dream. Some- 
body was standing by me. Hands took hold of me and 
pulled me away. 

I came to my senses again lying on a metal table in the 
little workshop and gasping for breath. My throat and 
nostrils were burning with some alcoholic vapor, my shirt 
was soaked in water, and my hair plastered over my skull. 

Snow was busy at a medicine cupboard, shifting instru- 
ments and glass vessels which clattered with an unbeara- 
ble din. Then his face appeared, looking gravely down 
into my eyes. 

“Where is she?” 

“She is not here.” 

“But . . . Rheya . . .” 

He bent over me, brought his face closer, and spoke 
very slowly and clearly: 

“Rheya is dead.” 

“She will come back,” I whispered. 

Instead of dreading her return, I wanted it. I did not 
attempt to remind myself why I myself had once tried to 
drive her away, and why I had been so afraid of her return. 


189 


“Drink this.” 

Snow held out a glass, and I threw it in his face. He 
staggered back, rubbing his eyes, and by the time he 
opened them again I was on my feet and standing over 
him. How small he was . . . 

“It was you.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“Come on Snow, you know what I mean. It was you who 
met her the other night. You told her to give me a sleep- 
ing pill . . . What has happened to her? Tell me!” 

He felt in his shirt-pocket and took out an envelope. I 
snatched it out of his hand. It was sealed, and there was 
no inscription. Inside was a sheet of paper folded twice, 
and I recognized the sprawling, rather childish handwrit- 
ing: 


“My darling, I was the one who asked him. He is a good 
man. I am sorry / had to lie to you. I beg you to give me 
this one wish — hear him out, and do nothing to harm 
yourself. You have been marvellous. ” 

There was one more word, which she had crossed out, 
but I could see that she had signed “Rheya.” 

My mind was now absolutely clear. Even if I had wanted 
to scream hysterically, my voice had gone, and I did not 
even have the strength to groan. 

“How . . . ?” 

“Later, Kelvin. You’ve got to calm down.” 

“I’m calm now. Tell me how." 

“Disintegration.” 

“But . . . what did you use?” 

“The Roche apparatus was unsuitable. Sartorius built 
something else, a new destabilizer. A miniature instru- 
ment, with a range of a few yards.” 

“And she ...” 

“She disappeared. A pop, and a puff of air. That’s all.” 

“A short-range instrument ...” 

“Yes, we didn’t have the resources for anything big- 
ger.” 


190 


The walls loomed over me, and I shut my eyes. 

“She will come back.” 

“No.” 

“What do you know about it?” 

“You remember the wings of foam? Since that day, they 
do not come back.” 

“You killed her,” I whispered. 

“Yes ... In my place, what else would you have done?” 

I turned away from him and began pacing up and down 
the room. Nine steps to the corner. About turn. Nine 
more rapid steps, and I was facing Snow again. 

“Listen, we’ll write a report. We’ll ask for an immediate 
link with the Council. It’s feasible, and they’ll accept — they 
must. The planet will no longer be subject to the four- 
power convention. We’ll be authorized to use any means 
at our disposal. We can send for anti-matter generators. 
Nothing can stand up against them, nothing ...” I was 
shouting now, and blinded with tears. 

“You want to destroy it? Why?” 

“Get out, leave me alone!” 

“No, I won’t get out.” 

“Snow!” I glared at him, and he shook his head. “What 
do you want? What am I supposed to do?” 

He walked back to the table. 

“Fine, we’ll draw up a report.” 

I started pacing again. 

“Sit down!” 

“I’ll do what I like!” 

“There are two distinct questions. One, the facts. Two, 
our recommendations.” 

“Do we have to talk about it now?” 

“Yes, now.” 

“I won’t listen, you hear? I’m not interested in your 
distinctions.” 

“We sent our last message about two months ago, 
before Gibarian’s death. We’ll have to establish exactly 
how the'visitor’phenomena function ...” 

I grabbed his arm: 

“Will you shut up!” 


191 


“Hit me if you like, but I will not shut up.” 

“Oh, talk away, if it gives you pleasure ...” I let him 

go ;< 

“Good, listen. Sartorius will want to conceal certain 
facts. I’m almost certain of it.” 

“And what about you? Won’t you conceal anything?” 

“No. Not now. This business goes further than individ- 
ual responsibilities. You know that as well as I do. ‘It’ has 
given a demonstration of considered activity. It is capable 
of carrying out organic synthesis on the most complex 
level, a synthesis we ourselves have never managed to 
achieve. It knows the structure, micro-structure and me- 
tabolism of our bodies ...” 

“All right . . . But why stop there? It has performed a 
series of. . . experiments on us. Psychic vivisection. It has 
used knowledge which it stole from our minds without 
our consent.” 

“Those are not facts, Kelvin. They are not even propo- 
sitions. They are theories. You could say that it has taken 
account of desires locked into secret recesses of our 
brains. Perhaps it was sending us . . . presents.” 

“Presents! My God!” I shook with a fit of uncontrollable 
laughter. 

“Take it easy!” Snow took hold of my hand, and I tight- 
ened my grip until I heard bones cracking. He went on 
looking at me without any change of expression. I let go, 
and walked over to a corner of the workshop: 

“I’ll try to get hold of myself.” 

“Yes, of course. I understand. What do we ask them?” 

“I leave it to you ... I can’t think straight right now. Did 
she say anything — before?” 

“No, nothing. If you want my opinion, from now on we 
stand a chance.” 

“A chance? What chance?” I stared at him, and light 
suddenly dawned. “Contact? Still Contact? Haven’t you 
had enough of this madhouse? What more do you need? 
No, it’s out of the question. Count me out!” 

“Why not,” he asked quietly. “You yourself instinctively 
treat it like a human being, now more than ever. You hate 
it.” 


192 



“And you don’t?” 

“No, Kelvin. It is blind.” — I thought that I might not 
have heard him correctly. — . . or rather it ‘sees’ in a 
different way from ourselves. We do not exist for it in the 
same sense that we exist for each other. We recognize one 
another by the appearance of the face and the body. That 
appearance is a transparent window to the ocean. It in- 
troduces itself directly into the brain.” 

“Right, what if it does? What are you driving at? It 
succeeded in recreating a human being who exists only in 
my memory, and so accurately that her eyes, her gestures, 
her voice ...” 

“Don’t stop. Talk.” 

“I’m talking . . . Her voice . . . because it is able to read 
us like a book. You see what I mean?” 

“Yes, that it could make itself understood.” 

“Doesn’t that follow?” 

“No, not necessarily. Perhaps it used a formula which 
is not expressed in verbal terms. It may be taken from a 
recording imprinted on our minds, but a man’s memory 
is stored in terms of nucleic acids etching asynchronous 
large-moleculed crystals. ‘It’ removed the deepest, most 
isolated imprint, the most ‘assimilated’ structure, without 
necessarily knowing what it meant to us. Suppose, I’m 
capable of reproducing the architecture of a symmetriad, 
and I know its composition and have the requisite tech- 
nology ... I create a symmetriad and I drop it into the 
ocean. But I don’t know why I’m doing so, I don’t know 
its function, and I don’t know what the symmetriad means 
to the ocean ...” 

“Yes. You may be right. In that case it wished us no 
harm, and it was not trying to destroy us. Yes, it’s possible 
. . . and with no intention ...” 

My mouth began to tremble. 

“Kelvin!” 

“All right, don’t get worried. You are kind, the ocean 
is kind. Everybody is kind. But why? Explain that. Why has 
it done this? What did you say ... to her?” 

“The truth.” 

“I asked you what you said.” 


193 


“You know very well. Come back to my cabin and we’ll 
write out the report. Come on.” 

“Wait. What exactly do you want? You can’t be intend- 
ing to remain in the Station.” 

“Yes, I want to stay.” 


194 



The Old Mimoid 


I sat by the panoramic window, looking at the ocean. 
There was nothing to do now that the report, which had 
taken five days to compile, was only a pattern of waves in 
space. It would be months before a similar pattern would 
leave earth to create its own line of disturbance in the 
gravitational field of the galaxy towards the twin suns of 
Solaris. 

Under the red sun, the ocean was darker than ever, and 
the horizon was obscured by a reddish mist. The weather 
was unusually close, and seemed to be building up to- 
wards one of the terrible hurricanes which broke out two 
or three times a year on the surface of the planet, whose 
sole inhabitant, it is reasonable to suppose, controlled the 
climate and willed its storms. 

There were several months to go before I could leave. 
From my vantage point in the observatory I would watch 
the birth of the days — a disc of pale gold or faded purple. 
Now and then I would come upon the light of dawn play- 
ing among the fluid forms of some edifice risen from the 
ocean, watch the sun reflected on the silver sphere of a 
symmetriad, follow the oscillations of the graceful agi- 
luses that curve in the wind, and linger to examine old 
powdery mimoids. 

And eventually, the screens of all the videophones 


195 


would start to blink and all the communications equip- 
ment would spring to life again, revived by an impulse 
originating billions of miles away and announcing the 
arrival of a metal colossus. The Ulysses, or it might be the 
Prometheus, would land on the Station to the piercing 
whine of its gravitors, and I would go out onto the flat roof 
to watch the squads of white, heavy-duty robots which 
proceed in all innocence with their tasks, not hesitating to 
destroy themselves or to destroy the unforeseen obstacle, 
in strict obedience to the orders etched into the crystals 
of their memory. Then the ship would rise noiselessly, 
faster than sound, leaving a sonic boom far behind over 
the ocean, and every passenger’s face would light up at the 
thought of going home. 

What did that word mean to me? Earth? I thought of the 
great bustling cities where I would wander and lose my- 
self, and I thought of them as I had thought of the ocean 
on the second or third night, when I had wanted to throw 
myself upon the dark waves. I shall immerse myself 
among men. I shall be silent and attentive, an appreciative 
companion. There will be many acquaintances, friends, 
women— and perhaps even a wife. For a while, I shall have 
to make a conscious effort to smile, nod, stand and per- 
form the thousands of little gestures which constitute life 
on Earth, and then those gestures will become reflexes 
again. I shall find new interests and occupations; and I 
shall not give myself completely to them, as I shall never 
again give myself completely to anything or anybody. Per- 
haps at night I shall stare up at the dark nebula that cuts 
off the light of the twin suns, and remember everything, 
even what I am thinking now. With a condescending, 
slightly rueful smile I shall remember my follies and my 
hopes. And this future Kelvin will be no less worthy a man 
than the Kelvin of the past, who was prepared for anything 
in the name of an ambitious enterprise called Contact. 
Nor will any man have the right to judge me. 

Snow came into the cabin, glanced around, then looked 
at me again. I went over to the table: 

“You wanted me?” 

“Haven’t you got anything to do? I could give you some 
work . . . calculations. Not a particularly urgent job ...” 


196 



“Thanks,” I smiled, “you needn’t have bothered.” 

“Are you sure?” 

“Yes, I was thinking a few things over, and ...” 

“I wish you’d think a little less.” 

“But you don’t know what I was thinking about! Tell me 
something. Do you believe in God?” 

Snow darted an apprehensive glance in my direction: 

“What? Who still believes nowadays ...” 

“It isn’t that simple. I don’t mean the traditional God 
of Earth religion. I’m no expert in the history of religions, 
and perhaps this is nothing new — do you happen to know 
if there was ever a belief in an . . . imperfect god?” 

“What do you mean by imperfect?” Snow frowned. “In 
a way all the gods of the old religions were imperfect, 
considering that their attributes were amplified human 
ones. The God of the Old Testament, for instance, 
required humble submission and sacrifices, and was jeal- 
ous of other gods. The Greek gods had fits of sulks and 
family quarrels, and they were just as imperfect as mor- 
tals ...” 

“No,” I interrupted. “I’m not thinking of a god whose 
imperfection arises out of the candor of his human crea- 
tors, but one whose imperfection represents his essential 
characteristic: a god limited in his omniscience and 
power, fallible, incapable of foreseeing the consequences 
of his acts, and creating things that lead to horror. He is 
a . . . sick god, whose ambitions exceed his powers and 
who does not realize it at first. A god who has created 
clocks, but not the time they measure. He has created 
systems or mechanisms that served specific ends but have 
now overstepped and betrayed them. And he has created 
eternity, which was to have measured his power, and 
which measures his unending defeat.” 

Snow hesitated, but his attitude no longer showed any 
of the wary reserve of recent weeks: 

“There was Manicheanism . . .” 

“Nothing at all to do with the principle of Good and 
Evil,” I broke in immediately. “This god has no existence 
outside of matter. He would like to free himself from 
matter, but he cannot ...” 

Snow pondered for a while: 


197 


“I don’t know of any religion that answers your descrip- 
tion. That kind of religion has never been . . . necessary. 
If I understand you, and I’m afraid I do, what you have in 
mind is an evolving god, who develops in the course of 
time, grows, and keeps increasing in power while remain- 
ing aware of his powerlessness. For your god, the divine 
condition is a situation without a goal. And understanding 
that, he despairs. But isn’t this despairing god of yours 
mankind, Kelvin? It is man you are talking about, and that 
is a fallacy, not just philosophically but also mystically 
speaking.” 

I kept on: 

“No, it’s nothing to do with man. Man may correspond 
to my provisional definition from some points of view, but 
that is because the definition has a lot of gaps. Man does 
not create gods, in spite of appearances. The times, the 
age, impose them on him. Man can serve his age or rebel 
against it, but the target of his cooperation or rebellion 
comes to him from outside. If there was only a single 
human being in existence, he would apparently be able to 
attempt the experiment of creating his own goals in com- 
plete freedom — apparently, because a man not brought 
up among other human beings cannot become a man. 
And the being — the being I have in mind — cannot exist in 
the plural, you see?” 

“Oh, then in that case ...” He pointed out of the 
window. 

“No, not the ocean either. Somewhere in its develop- 
ment it has probably come close to the divine state, but 
it turned back into itself too soon. It is more like an an- 
chorite, a hermit of the cosmos, not a god. It repeats 
itself, Snow, and the being I’m thinking of would never do 
that. Perhaps he has already been born somewhere, in 
some corner of the galaxy, and soon he will have some 
childish enthusiasm that will set him putting out one 
star and lighting another. We will notice him after a 
while ...” 

“We already have,” Snow said sarcastically. “Novas and 
supernovas. According to you they are the candles on his 
altar.” 


198 



“If you’re going to take what I say literally ...” 

“And perhaps Solaris is the cradle of your divine 
child,” Snow went on, with a widening grin that increased 
the number of lines round his eyes. “Solaris could be the 
first phase of the despairing God. Perhaps its intelligence 
will grow enormously. All the contents of our Solar- 
ist libraries could be just a record of his teething trou- 
bles ...” 

“. . . and we will have been the baby’s toys for a while. 
It is possible. And do you know what you have just done? 
You’ve produced a completely new hypothesis about 
Solaris — congratulations! Everything suddenly falls into 
place: the failure to achieve contact, the absence of re- 
sponses, various . . . let’s say various peculiarities in its 
behavior towards ourselves. Everything is explicable in 
terms of the behaviour of a small child.” 

“I renounce paternity of the theory,” Snow grunted, 
standing at the window 

For a long instant, we stood staring out at the dark 
waves. A long pale patch was coming into view to the east, 
in the mist obscuring the horizon. 

Without taking his eyes off the shimmering waste. Snow 
asked abruptly: 

“What gave you this idea of an imperfect god?” 

“I don’t know. It seems quite feasible to me. That is the 
only god I could imagine believing in, a god whose pas- 
sion is not a redemption, who saves nothing, fulfils no 
purpose — a god who simply is.” 

“A mimoid,” Snow breathed. 

“What’s that? Oh yes, I’d noticed it. A very old mi- 
moid.” 

We both looked towards the misty horizon. 

“I’m going outside,” I said abruptly. “I’ve never yet 
been off the Station, and this is a good opportunity. I’ll be 
back in half an hour.” 

Snow raised his eyebrows: 

“What? You’re going out? Where are you going?” 

I pointed towards the flesh-colored patch half-hidden 
by the mist: 

“Over there. What is there to stop me? I’ll take a small 


199 


helicopter. When I get back to Earth I don’t want to have 
to confess that I’m a Solarist who has never set foot on 
Solaris!” 

I opened a locker and started rummaging through the 
atmosphere-suits, while Snow looked on silently. Finally 
he said: 

“I don’t like it.” 

I had selected a suit. Now I turned towards him: 

“What?” I had not felt so excited for a long time. “What 
are you worrying about? Out with it! You’re afraid that I 
... I promise you I have no intention ... it never entered 
my mind, honestly.” 

“I’ll go with you.” 

“Thanks, but I’d rather go alone.” I pulled on the suit. 
“Do you realize this will be my first flight over the ocean?” 

Snow muttered something, but I could not make out 
what. I was in a hurry to get the rest of the gear together. 

He accompanied me to the hangar deck, and helped me 
drag the flitter out onto the elevator disc. As I was check- 
ing my suit, he asked me abruptly: 

“Can I rely on your word?” 

“Still fretting? Yes, you can. Where are the oxygen 
tanks?” 76 

We exchanged no further words. I slid the transparent 
canopy shut, gave him the signal, and he set the lift going. 
I emerged onto the Station roof; the motor burst into life; 
the three blades turned and the machine rose— -strangely 
light — into the air. Soon the Station had fallen far behind. 

Alone over the ocean, I saw it with a different eye. I was 
flying quite low, at about a hundred feet, and for the first 
time I felt a sensation often described by the explorers but 
which I had never noticed from the height of the Station- 
the alternating motion of the gleaming waves was not at 
all like the undulation of the sea or the billowing of clouds. 
It was like the crawling skin of an animal— the incessant, 
slow-motion contractions of muscular flesh secreting a 
crimson foam. 

When I started to bank towards the drifting mimoid, 
the sun shone into my eyes and blood-red flashes struck 
the curved canopy. The dark ocean, flickering with som- 
bre flames, was tinged with blue. 


200 


The flitter came around too wide, and I was carried a 
long way down wind from the mimoid, a long irregular 
silhouette looming out of the ocean. Emerging from the 
mist, the mimoid was no longer pink, but a yellowish grey. 
I lost sight of it momentarily, and glimpsed the Station, 
which seemed to be sitting on the horizon, and whose 
outline was reminiscent of an ancient zeppelin. I changed 
course, and the sheer mass of the mimoid grew in my line 
of vision— a baroque sculpture. I was afraid of crashing 
into the bulbous swellings, and pulled the flitter up so 
brutally that it lost speed and started to lurch; but my 
caution was unnecessary, for the rounded peaks of those 
fantastic towers were subsiding. 

I flew past the island; and slowly, yard by yard, I de- 
scended to the level of the eroded peaks. The mimoid was 
not large. It measured about three quarters of a mile from 
end to end, and was a few hundred yards wide. In some 
places, it was close to splitting apart. This mimoid was 
obviously a fragment of a far larger formation. On the 
scale of Solaris it was only a tiny splinter, weeks or per- 
haps months old. 

Among the mottled crags overhanging the ocean, I 
found a kind of beach, a sloping, fairly even surface a few 
yards square, and steered towards it. The rotors almost 
hit a cliff that reared up suddenly in my path, but I landed 
safely, cut the motor and slid back the canopy. Standing 
on the fuselage I made sure that there was no chance of 
the flitter sliding into the ocean. Waves were licking at the 
jagged bank about fifteen paces away, but the machine 
rested solidly on its legs, and I jumped to the ‘ground.’ 

The cliff I had almost hit was a huge bony membrane 
pierced with holes, and full of knotty swellings. A crack 
several yards wide split this wall diagonally and enabled 
me to examine the interior of the island, already glimpsed 
through the apertures in the membrane. I edged warily 
onto the nearest ledge, but my boots showed no tendency 
to slide and the suit did not impede my movements, and 
I went on climbing until I had reached a height of about 
four storeys above the ocean, and could see a broad 
stretch of petrified landscape stretching back until it was 
lost from sight in the depths of the mimoid. 


201 


It was like looking at the ruins of an ancient town, a 
Moroccan city tens of centuries old, convulsed by an 
earthquake or some other disaster. I made out a tangled 
web of winding sidestreets choked with debris, and alley- 
ways which fell abruptly towards the oily foam that floated 
close to the shore. In the middle distance, great battle- 
ments stood intact, sustained by ossified buttresses. 
There were dark openings in the swollen, sunken walls — 
traces of windows or loop-holes. The whole of this float- 
ing town canted to one side or another like a foundering 
ship, pitched and turned slowly, and the sun cast continu- 
ally moving shadows, which crept among the ruined al- 
leys. Now and again a polished surface caught and 
reflected the light. I took the risk of climbing higher, then 
stopped; rivulets of fine sand were beginning to trickle 
down the rocks above my head, cascading into ravines 
and alleyways and rebounding in swirling clouds of dust. 
The mimoid is not made of stone, and to dispel the illu- 
sion one only has to pick up a piece of it: it is lighter than 
pumice, and composed of small, very porous cells. 

Now I was high enough to feel the swaying of the mi- 
moid. It was moving forward, propelled by the dark mus- 
cles of the ocean towards an unknown destination, but its 
inclination varied. It rolled from side to side, and the 
languid oscillation was accompanied by the gentle rus- 
tling sound of the yellow and grey foam which streamed 
off the emerging shore. The mimoid had acquired its 
swinging motion long before, probably at its birth, and 
even while it grew and broke up it had retained its initial 
pattern. 

Only now did I realize that I was not in the least con- 
cerned with the mimoid, and that I had flown here not to 
explore the formation but to acquaint myself with the 
ocean. 

With the flitter a few paces behind me, I sat on the 
rough, fissured beach. A heavy black wave broke over the 
edge of the bank and spread out, not black, but a dirty 
green. The ebbing wave left viscous streamlets behind, 
which flowed back quivering towards the ocean. I went 
closer, and when the next wave came I held out my hand. 


202 



What followed was a faithful reproduction of a phenome- 
non which had been analyzed a century before: the wave 
hesitated, recoiled, then enveloped my hand without 
touching it, so that a thin covering of ‘air’ separated my 
glove inside a cavity which had been fluid a moment previ- 
ously, and now had a fleshy consistency. I raised my hand 
slowly, and the wave, or rather an outcrop of the wave, 
rose at the same time, enfolding my hand in a translucent 
cyst with greenish reflections. I stood up, so as to raise my 
hand still higher, and the gelatinous substance stretched 
like a rope, but did not break. The main body of the wave 
remained motionless on the shore, surrounding my feet 
without touching them, like some strange beast patiently 
waiting for the experiment to finish. A flower had grown 
out of the ocean, and its calyx was moulded to my fingers. 
I stepped back. The stem trembled, stirred uncertainly 
and fell back into the wave, which gathered it and receded. 

I repeated the game several times, until — as the first 
experimenter had observed — a wave arrived which 
avoided me indifferently, as if bored with a too familiar 
sensation. I knew that to revive the ‘curiosity’ of the ocean 
I would have to wait several hours. Disturbed by the phe- 
nomenon I had stimulated, I sat down again. Although I 
had read numerous accounts of it, none of them had pre- 
pared me for the experience as I had lived it, and I felt 
somehow changed. 

In all their movements, taken together or singly, each 
of these branches reaching out of the ocean seemed to 
display a kind of cautious but not feral alertness, a curi- 
osity avid for quick apprehension of a new, unexpected 
form, and regretful at having to retreat, unable to exceed 
the limits set by a mysterious law. The contrast was inex- 
pressible between that lively curiosity and the shimmer- 
ing immensity of the ocean that stretched away out of 
sight ... I had never felt its gigantic presence so strongly, 
or its powerful changeless silence, or the secret forces 
that gave the waves their regular rise and fall. I sat unsee- 
ing, and sank into a universe of inertia, glided down an 
irresistible slope and identified myself with the dumb, 
fluid colossus; it was as if I had forgiven it everything. 


203 


without the slightest effort of word or thought. 

During that last week, I had been behaving so normally 
that Snow had stopped keeping a watchful eye on me. On 
the surface, I was calm: in secret, without really admitting 
it, I was waiting for something. Her return? How could I 
have been waiting for that? We all know that we are 
material creatures, subject to the laws of physiology and 
physics, and not even the power of all our feelings com- 
bined can defeat those laws. All we can do is detest them. 
The age-old faith of lovers and poets in the power of love, 
stronger than death, that finis vitae sed non amoris, is a lie, 
useless and not even funny. So must one be resigned to 
being a clock that measures the passage of time, now out 
of order, now repaired, and whose mechanism generates 
despair and love as soon as its maker sets it going? Are 
we to grow used to the idea that every man relives ancient 
torments, which are all the more profound because they 
grow comic with repetition? That human existence should 
repeat itself, well and good, but that it should repeat itself 
like a hackneyed tune, or a record a drunkard keeps play- 
ing as he feeds coins into the jukebox . . . 

That liquid giant had been the death of hundreds of 
men. The entire human race had tried in vain to establish 
even the most tenuous link with it, and it bore my weight 
without noticing me any more than it would notice a speck 
of dust. I did not believe that it could respond to the 
tragedy of two human beings. Yet its activities did have a 
purpose . . . True, I was not absolutely certain, but leaving 
would mean giving up a chance, perhaps an infinitesimal 
one, perhaps only imaginary . . . Must I go on living here 
then, among the objects we both had touched, in the air 
she had breathed? In the name of what? In the hope of her 
return? I hoped for nothing. And yet I lived in expecta- 
tion. Since she had gone, that was all that remained. I did 
not know what achievements, what mockery, even what 
tortures still awaited me. I knew nothing, and I persisted 
in the faith that the time of cruel miracles was not past. 


204 


Books by Stamslaw Lem Available in 
Harvest paperback editions from Harcourt, Inc. 


The Chain of Chance 

The Cyberiad: Fables for the Cybernetic Age 
Eden 
Fiasco 

The Futurological Congress 
His Master’s Voice 
Hospital of Transfiguration 
Imaginary Magnitude 
The Investigation 
Memoirs Found in a Bathtub 
Memoirs of a Space Traveler: 
Further Remembrances of Ijon Tichy 
Microworlds: Writings on 
Science Fiction and Fantasy 
More Tales of Pirx the Pilot 
Mortal Engines 
One Human Minute 
A Perfect Vacuum 
Return from the Stars 
Solaris 

The Star Diaries 
Tales of Pirx the Pilot 






SCIENCE FICTION 


A fantastic book/'— steven Soderbergh 

W HEN PSYCHOLOGIST Kris Kelvin arrives at the planet Solaris to study the 
ocean that covers its surface, he finds himself confronting a painful memory embod- 
ied in the physical likeness of a past lover. Kelvin learns that he is not alone in this, and that 
other crews examining the planet are plagued with their own repressed and newly real memo- 
ries. Could it be, as Solaris scientists speculate, that the ocean may be a massive neural center 
creating these memories, for a reason no one can identify? 

Long considered a classic, Solaris asks the question: Can we understand the universe 
around us without first understanding what lies within? 

[Lem] is one of the most intelligent, erudite, and comic writers working today." 

— ANTHONY BURGESS 

"Few are [Lem's] peers in poetic expression, in word play, and in imaginative and 
sophisticated sympathy." - K U R T V 0 N N E G U T 

STANISLAW LEM is the most widely translated and best known science fiction author writ- 
ing outside of the English language. Winner of the Kafka Prize, he is a contributor to many 
magazines, including the New Yorker, and he is the author of numerous works. Solaris was first 
published in English in 1970. 


Solaris film artwork © 2002 Twentieth Century Fox film Corporation. 
All rights reserved. 

Cover design by Liz Demeter 

A HARVEST BOOK 
HARCOURT, INC. 

525 B Street, San Diego, CA 92101 
15 East 26th Street, New York, NY 10010 
www.HarcourtBooks.com 





i 



2001: A Space Odissey 
Arthur C. Clarke 


For e word 


Behind every man now alive stand thirty ghosts, for that is the ratio by 
which the dead outnumber the living. Since the dawn of time, roughly a hundred 
billion human beings have walked the planet Earth. 

Now this is an interesting number, for by a curious coincidence there are 
approximately a hundred billion stars in our local universe, the Milky Way. So 
for every man who has e ver lived, in this Universe there shines a star. 




But every one of those stars is a sun, often far more brilliant and glorious 
than the small, nearby star we call the Sun. And many - perhaps most - of those 
alien suns have planets circling them. So almost certainly there is enough land in 
the sky to give every member of the human species, back to the first ape-man, 
his own private, world-sized heaven - or hell. 

How many of those potential heavens and hells are now inhabited, and by 
what manner of creatures, we have no way of guessing; the very nearest is a 
million times farther away than Mars or Venus, those stili remote goals of the 
next generation. But the barriers of distance are crumbling; one day we shall 
meet our equals, or our masters, among the stars. 

Men have been slow to face this prospect; some stili hope that it may 
never become reality. Increasing numbers, however, are asking: “Why have such 
meetings not occurred already, since we ourselves are about to venture into 
space?” 


Why not, indeed? Here is one possible answer to that very reasonable 
question. But please remembert thi sis only a work of fiction. 

The truth, as always, will be far stranger. 


To Stanley 


I - PRIMEVAL NIGHT 



2001-A Space Odyssey 


1 - The Road to Extinction 


The drought had lasted now for ten million years, and the reign of the 
terrible lizards had long since ended. Here on the Equator, in the continent which 
would one day be known as Africa, the battle for existence had reached a new 
climax of ferocity, and the victor was not yet in sight. In this barren and 
desiccated land, only the small or the swift or the fierce could flourish, or even 
hope to survive. 

The man-apes of the veldt were none of the se things, and they were not 
flourishing. Indeed, they were already far down the road to racial extinction. 
About fifty of them occupied a group of caves overlooking a small, parched 
valley, which was divided by a sluggish stream fed from snows in the mountains 
two hundred miles to the north. In bad times the stream vanished completely, and 
the tribe lived in the shadow of thirst. 

It was always hungry, and now it was starving. When the first faint glow 
of dawn crept into the cave, Moon-Watcher saw that his father had died in the 
night. He did not know that the Old One was his father, for such a relationship 
was utterly beyond his understanding, but as he looked at the emaciated body he 
felt dim disquiet that was the ancestor of sadness. 

The two babies were already whimpering for food, but became silent when 
Moon-Watcher snarled at them. One of the mothers, defending the infant she 
could not properly feed, gave him an angry growl in return; he lacked the energy 
even to cuff her for her presumption. 

Now it was light enough to leave. Moon-Watcher picked up the shriveled 
corpse and dragged it after him as he bent under the low overhang of the cave. 
Once outside, he threw the body over his shoulder and stood upright - the only 
animal in all this world able to do so. 



Among his kind, Moon-Watcher was almost a giant. He was nearly five 
feet high, and though badly undernourished weighed over a hundred pounds. His 
hairy, muscular body was halfway between ape and man, but his head was 
already much nearer to man than ape. The forehead was low, and there were 
ridges over the eye sockets, yet he unmistakably held in his genes the promise of 
humanity. As he looked out upon the hostile world of the Pleistocene, there was 
already something in his gaze beyond the capacity of any ape. In those dark, 
deep-set eyes was a dawning awareness - the first intimations of an intelligence 
that could not possibly fulfill itself for ages yet, and might soon be extinguished 
forever. 

There was no sign of danger, so Moon-Watcher began to scramble down 
the almost vertical slope outside the cave, only slightly hindered by his burden. 
As if they had been waiting for his signal, the rest of the tribe emerged from their 
own homes farther down the rock face, and began to hasten toward the muddy 
waters of the stream for their morning drink. 

Moon-Watcher looked across the valley to see if the Others were in sight, 
but there was no trace of them. Perhaps they had not yet left their caves, or were 
already foraging farther along the hillside. Since they were nowhere to be seen, 
Moon-Watcher forgot them; he was incapable of worrying about more than one 
thing at a time. 

First he must get rid of the Old One, but this was a problem that demanded 
little thought. There had been many deaths this season, one of them in his own 
cave; he had only to put the corpse where he had left the new baby at the last 
quarter of the moon, and the hyenas would do the rest. 

They were already waiting, where the little valley fanned out into the 
savanna, almost as if they had known that he was coming. Moon-Watcher left 
the body under a small bush - all the earlier bones were already gone - and 
hurried back to rejoin the tribe. He never thought of his father again. 

His two mates, the adults from the other caves, and most of the youngsters 
were foraging among the drought-stunted trees farther up the valley, looking for 
berries, succulent roots and leaves, and occasional windfalls like small lizards or 
rodents. Only the babies and the feeblest of the old folk were left in the caves; if 
there was any surplus food at the end of the day's searching, they might be fed. If 



not, the hyenas would soon be in luck once more. 


But this day was a good one - though as Moon-Watcher had no real 
remembrance of the past, he could not compare one time with another. He had 
found a hive of bees in the stump of a dead tree, and so had enjoyed the finest 
delicacy that his people could ever know; he stili licked his fingers from time to 
time as he led the group homeward in the late afternoon. Of course, he had also 
collected a fair number of stings, but he had scarcely noticed them. He was now 
as near to contentment as he was ever likely to be; for though he was stili 
hungry, he was not actually weak with hunger. That was the most to which any 
man-ape could ever aspire. 

His contentment vanished when he reached the stream. The Others were 
there. They were there every day, but that did not make it any the less annoying. 

There were about thirty of them, and they could not have been 
distinguished from the members of MoonWatcher's own tribe. As they saw him 
coming they begun to dance, shake their arms, and shriek on their side of the 
stream, and his own people replied in kind. 

And that was all that happened. Though the man-apes often fought and 
wrestled one another, their disputes very seldom resulted in serious injuries. 
Having no claws or fighting canine teeth, and being well protected by hair, they 
could not inflict much harm on one another. In any event, they had little surplus 
energy for such unproductive behavior; snarling and threatening was a much 
more efficient way of asserting their points of view. 

The confrontation lasted about five minutes; then the display died out as 
quickly as it had begun, and everyone drank his fili of the muddy water. Honor 
had been satisfied; each group had staked its claim to its own territory. This 
important business having been settled, the tribe moved off along its side of the 
river. The nearest worthwhile grazing was now more than a mile from the caves, 
and they had to share it with a herd of large, antelope-like beasts who barely 
tolerated their presence. They could not be driven away, for they were armed 
with ferocious daggers on their foreheads - the natural weapons which the man- 
apes did not possess. 

So Moon-Watcher and his companions chewed berries and fruit and leaves 
and fought off the pangs of hunger - while all around them, competing for the 



same fodder, was a potential source of more food than they could ever hope to 
eat. Yet the thousands of tons of succulent meat roaming over the savanna and 
through the bush was not only beyond their reach; it was beyond their 
imagination. In the midst of plenty, they were slowly starving to death. 

The tribe returned to its cave without incident, in the last light of the day. 
The injured female who had remained behind cooed with pleasure as Moon- 
Watcher gave her the berry-covered branch he had brought back, and began to 
attack it ravenously. There was little enough nourishment here, but it would help 
her to survive until the wound the leopard had given her had healed, and she 
could forage for herself again. 

Over the valley, a full moon was rising, and a chill wind was blowing 
down from the distant mountains. It would be very cold tonight - but cold, like 
hunger, was not a matter for any real concern; it was merely part of the 
background of life. 

Moon-Watcher barely stirred when the shrieks and screams echoed up the 
slope from one of the lower caves, and he did not need to hear the occasional 
growl of the leopard to know exactly what was happening. 

Down there in the darkness old White Hair and his family were fighting 
and dying, and the thought that he might help in some way never crossed Moon- 
Watcher^ mind. The harsh logic of survival ruled out such fancies, and not a 
voice was raised in protest from the listening hillside. Every cave was silent, lest 
it also attract disaster. 

The tumuit died away, and presently Moon-Watcher could hear the sound 
of a body being dragged over rocks. That lasted only a few seconds; then the 
leopard got a good hold on its kill. It made no further noise as it padded silently 
away, carrying its victim effortlessly in its jaws. 

For a day or two, there would be no further danger here, but there might 
be other enemies abroad, taking advantage of this cold Little Sun that shone only 
by night. If there was sufficient warning, the smaller predators could sometimes 
be scared away by shouts and screams. Moon-Watcher crawled out of the cave, 
clambered onto a large boulder beside the entrance, and squatted there to survey 
the valley. 



Of all the creatures who had yet walked on Earth, the man-apes were the 
first to look steadfastly at the Moon. And though he could not remember it, when 
he was very young Moon-Watcher would sometimes reach out and try to touch 
that ghostly face rising above the hilis. 

He had never succeeded, and now he was old enough to understand why. 
For first, of course, he must find a high enough tree to climb. 

Sometimes he watched the valley, and sometimes he watched the Moon, 
but always he listened. Once or twice he dozed off, but he slept with a hair- 
trigger alertness, and the slightest sound would have disturbed him. At the great 
age of twenty-five, he was stili in full possession of all his faculties; if his luck 
continued, and he avoided accidents, disease, predators, and starvation, he might 
survive for as much as another ten years. 

The night wore on, cold and ciear, without further alarms, and the Moon 
rose slowly amid equatorial constellations that no human eye would ever see. In 
the caves, between spells of fitful dozing and fearful waiting, were being born 
the nightmares of generations yet to be. 

And twice there passed slowly across the sky, rising up to the zenith and 
descending into the east, a dazzling point of light more brilliant than any star. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

2 - The New Rock 


Late that night, Moon-Watcher suddenly awoke. Tired out by the day's 
exertions and disasters, he had been sleeping more soundly than usual, yet he 
was instantly alert at the first faint scrabbling down in the valley. 

He sat up in the fetid darkness of the cave, straining his senses out into the 
night, and fear crept slowly into his soul. Never in his life - already twice as long 
as most members of his species could expect - had he heard a sound like this. 
The great cats approached in silence, and the only thing that betrayed them was a 
rare slide of earth, or the occasional cracking of a twig. Yet this was a 
continuous crunching noise, that grew steadily louder. It seemed that some 
enormous beast was moving through the night, making no attempt at 
concealment, and ignoring all obstacles. Once Moon-Watcher heard the 
unmistakable sound of a bush, being uprooted; the elephants and dinotheria did 
this often enough, but otherwise they moved as silently as the cats. 

And then there came a sound which Moon-Watcher could not possibly 
have identified, for it had never been heard before in the history of the world. It 
was the clank of metal upon stone. 

Moon-Watcher came face to face with the New Rock when he led the tribe 
down to the river in the first light of morning. He had almost forgotten the 
terrors of the night, because nothing had happened after that initial noise, so he 
did not even associate this strange thing with danger or with fear. There was, 
after all, nothing in the least alarming about it. 

It was a rectangular slab, three times his height but narrow enough to span 
with his arms, and it was made of some completely transparent material; indeed, 
it was not easy to see except when the rising sun glinted on its edges. As Moon- 
Watcher had never encountered ice, or even crystal-clear water, there were no 



natural objects to which he could compare this apparition. It was certainly rather 
attractive, and though he was wisely cautious of most new things, he did not 
hesitate for long before sidling up to it. As nothing happened, he put out his 
hand, and felt a cold, hard surface. 

After several minutes of intense thought, he arrived at a brilliant 
explanation. It was a rock, of course, and it must have grown during the night. 
There were many plants that did this - white, pulpy things shaped like pebbles, 
that seemed to shoot up during the hours of darkness. It was true that they were 
small and round, whereas this was large and sharp-edged; but greater and later 
philosophers than Moon-Watcher would be prepared to overlook equally striking 
exceptions to their theories. 

This really superb piece of abstract thinking led Moon-Watcher, after only 
three or four minutes, to a deduction which he immediately put to the test. The 
white round pebble-plants were very tasty (though there were a few that 
produced violent illness); perhaps this tali one...? 

A few licks and attempted nibbles quickly disillusioned him. There was no 
nourishment here; so like a sensible man-ape, he continued on his way to the 
river and forgot all about the crystalline monolith, during the daily routine of 
shrieking at the Others. 

The foraging today was very bad, and the tribe had to travel several miles 
from the caves to find any food at all. During the merciless heat of noon one of 
the frailer females collapsed, far from any possible shelter. Her companions 
gathered round her, twittering and meeping sympathetically, but there was 
nothing that anyone could do. If they had been less exhausted they might have 
carried her with them, but there was no surplus energy for such acts of kindness. 
She had to be left behind, to recover or not with her own resources. They passed 
the spot on the homeward trek that evening; there was not a bone to be seen. 

In the last light of day, looking round anxiously for early hunters, they 
drank hastily at the stream and started the climb up to their caves. They were stili 
a hundred yards from the New Rock when the sound began. 

It was barely audible, yet it stopped them dead, so that they stood 
paralyzed on the trail with their jaws hanging slackly. A simple, maddeningly 
repetitious vibration, it pulsed out from the crystal; and hypnotized all who came 



within its spell. For the first time - and the last, for three million years - the 
sound of drumming was heard in Africa. 

The throbbing grew louder, more insistent. Presently the man-apes began 
to move forward, like sleepwalkers, toward the source of that compulsive sound. 
Sometimes they took little dancing steps, as their blood responded to rhythms 
that their descendants would not create for ages yet. Totally entranced, they 
gathered round the monolith, forgetting the hardships of the day, the perils of the 
approaching dusk, and the hunger in their bellies. 

The drumming became louder, the night darker. And as the shadows 
lengthened and the light drained from the sky, the crystal began to glow. 

First it lost its transparency, and became suffused with a pale, milky 
luminescence, Tantalizing, ill-defined phantoms moved across its surface and in 
its depths. They coalesced into bars of light and shadow, then formed 
intermeshing, spoked patterns that began slowly to rotate. 

Faster and faster spun the wheels of light, and the throbbing of the drums 
accelerated with them. Now utterly hypnotized, the man-apes could only stare 
slack-jawed into this astonishing display of pyrotechnics. They had already 
forgotten the instincts of their forefathers and the lessons of a lifetime; not one of 
them, ordinarily, would have been so far from his cave, so late in the evening. 
For the surrounding brush was full of frozen shapes and staring eyes, as the 
creatures of the night suspended their business to see what would happen next. 

Now the spinning wheels of light began to merge, and the spokes fused 
into luminous bars that slowly receded into the distance, rotating on their axes as 
they did so. They split into pairs and the resulting sets of lines started to oscillate 
across one another, slowly changing their angles of intersection. Fantastic, 
fleeting geometrical patterns flickered in and out of existence as the glowing 
grids meshed and unmeshed; and the man-apes watched, mesmerized captives of 
the shining crystal. 

They could never guess that their minds were being probed, their bodies 
mapped, their reactions studied, their potentials evaluated. At first, the whole 
tribe remained half crouching in a motionless tableau, as if frozen into stone. 
Then the man-ape nearest to the slab suddenly came to life. 



He did not move from his position, but his body lost its trancelike rigidity 
and became animated as if it were a puppet controlled by invisible strings. The 
head turned this way and that; the mouth silently opened and closed; the hands 
clenched and unclenched. Then he bent down, snapped off a long stalk of grass, 
and attempted to tie it into a knot with clumsy fingers. 

He seemed to be a thing possessed, struggling against some spirit or 
demon who had taken over control of his body. He was panting for breath, and 
his eyes were full of terror as he tried to force his fingers to make movements 
more complex than any that they had ever attempted before. 

Despite all his efforts, he succeeded only in breaking the stalk into pieces. 
As the fragments feli to the ground, the controlling influence left him, and he 
froze once more into immobility. 

Another man-ape came to life, and went through the same routine. This 
was a younger, more adaptable specimen; it succeeded where the older one had 
failed. On the planet Earth, the first crude knot had been tied. 

Others did stranger and stili more pointless things. Some held their hands 
out at arm's length, and tried to touch their fingertips together - first with both 
eyes open, then with one closed. Some were made to stare at ruled patterns in the 
crystal, which became more and more finely divided until the lines had merged 
into a gray blur. And all heard single pure sounds, of varying pitch, that swiftly 
sank below the level of hearing. 

When Moon-Watcher's turn came, he felt very little fear. His main 
sensation was a dull resentment, as his muscles twitched and his limbs moved at 
commands that were not wholly his own. Without knowing why, he bent down 
and picked up a small stone. When he straightened up, he saw that there was a 
new image in the crystal slab. 

The grids and the moving, dancing patterns had gone. Instead, there was a 
series of concentric circles, surrounding a small black disk. Obeying the silent 
orders in his brain, he pitched the stone with a clumsy, overarm throw. It missed 
the target by several feet. 

Try again, said the command. He searched around until he had found 
another pebble. This time it hit the slab with a ringing, bell-like tone. He was 



stili a long way off, but his aim was improving. At the fourth attempt, he was 
only inches from the Central bull's-eye. A feeling of indescribable pleasure, 
almost sexual in its intensity, flooded his mind. Then the control relaxed; he felt 
no impulse to do anything, except to stand and wait. 

One by one, every member of the tribe was briefly possessed. Some 
succeeded, but most failed at the tasks they had been set, and all were 
appropriately rewarded by spasms of pleasure or of pain. 

Now there was only a uniform featureless glow in the great slab, so that it 
stood like a block of light superimposed oil the surrounding darkness. As if 
waking from a sleep, the man-apes shook their heads, and presently began to 
move along the trail to their place of shelter. They did not look back, or wonder 
at the strange light that was guiding them to their homes - and to a future 
unknown, as yet, even to the stars. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

3 - Academy 


Moon-Watcher and his companions had no recollection of what they had 
seen, after the crystal had ceased to cast its hypnotic spell over their minds and 
to experiment with their bodies. The next day, as they went out to forage, they 
passed it with scarcely a second thought; it was now part of the disregarded 
background of their lives. They could not eat it, and it could not eat them; 
therefore it was not important. 

Down at the river, the Others made their usual ineffectual threats. Their 
leader, a one-eared man-ape of Moon-Watcher's size and age, but in poorer 
condition, even made a brief foray toward the tribe's territory, screaming loudly 
and waving his arms in an attempt to scare the opposition and to bolster his own 
courage. 

The water of the stream was nowhere more than a foot deep, but the 
farther One-Ear moved out into it, the more uncertain and unhappy he became. 
Very soon he slowed to a halt, and then moved back, with exaggerated dignity, to 
join his companions. 

Otherwise, there was no change in the normal routine. The tribe gathered 
just enough nourishment to survive for another day, and no one died. 

And that night, the crystal slab was stili waiting; surrounded by its pulsing 
aura of light and sound. The program it had contrived, however, was now subtly 
different. 

Some, of the man-apes it ignored completely, as if it was concentrating on 
the most promising subjects. 

One of them was Moon-Watcher; once again he felt inquisitive tendrils 



creeping down the unused byways of his brain. And presently, he began to see 
visions. They might have been within the crystal block; they might have been 
wholly inside his mind. In any event, to Moon-Watcher they were completely 
real. Yet somehow the usual automatic impulse to drive off invaders of his 
territory had been lulled into quiescence. 

He was looking at a peaceful family group, differing in only one respect 
from the scenes he knew. The male, female, and two infants that had 
mysteriously appeared before him were gorged and replete, with sleek and 
glossy pelts - and this was a condition of life that Moon-Watcher had never 
imagined. Unconsciously, he felt his own protruding ribs; the ribs of these 
creatures were hidden in rolls of fat. From time to time they stirred lazily, as they 
lolled at ease near the entrance of a cave, apparently at peace with the world. 
Occasionally; the big male emitted a monumental burp of contentment. 

There was no other activity, and after five minutes the scene suddenly 
faded out. The crystal was no more than a glimmering outline in the darkness; 
Moon-Watcher shook himself as if awaking from a dream, abruptly realized 
where he was, and led the tribe back to the caves. 

He had no conscious memory of what he had seen; but that night, as he sat 
brooding at the entrance of his lair, his ears attuned to the noises of the world 
around him, Moon-Watcher felt the first faint twinges of a new and potent 
emotion. It was a vague and diffuse sense of envy - of dissatisfaction with his 
life. He had no idea of its cause, stili less of its cure; but discontent had come 
into his soul, and he had taken one small step toward humanity. 

Night after night, the spectacle of those four plump man-apes was 
repeated, until it had become a source of fascinated exasperation, serving to 
increase Moon-Watcher's eternal, gnawing hunger. The evidence of his eyes 
could not have produced this effect; it needed psychological reinforcement. 
There were gaps in Moon-Watcher's life now that he would never remember, 
when the very atoms of his simple brain were being twisted into new patterns. If 
he survived, those patterns would become eternal, for his genes would pass them 
on to future generations. 

It was a slow, tedious business, but the crystal monolith was patient. 
Neither it, nor its replicas scattered across half the globe, expected to succeed 
with ali the scores of groups involved in the experiment. A hundred failures 



would not matter, when a single success could change the destiny of the world. 


By the time of the next new moon, the tribe had seen one birth and two 
deaths. One of these had been due to starvation; the other had occurred during 
the nightly ritual, when a man-ape had suddenly collapsed while attempting to 
tap two pieces of stone delicately together. At once, the crystal had darkened, 
and the tribe had been released from the spell. But the fallen man-ape had not 
moved; and by the morning, of course, the body was gone. 

There had been no performance the next night; the crystal was stili 
analyzing its mistake. The tribe streamed past it through the gathering dusk, 
ignoring its presence completely. The night after, it was ready for them again. 
The four plump man-apes were stili there, and now they were doing 
extraordinary things. Moon-Watcher began to tremble uncontrollably; he felt as 
if his brain would burst, and wanted to turn away his eyes. But that remorseless 
mental control would not relax its grip; he was compelled to follow the lesson to 
the end, though all his instincts revolted against it. 

Those instincts had served his ancestors well, in the days of warm rains 
and lush fertility, when food was to be had everywhere for the plucking. Now 
times had changed, and the inherited wisdom of the past had become folly. The 
man-apes must adapt, or they must die - like the greater beasts who had gone 
before them, and whose bones now lay sealed within the limestone hilis. 

So Moon-Watcher stared at the crystal monolith with unblinking eyes, 
while his brain lay open to its stili uncertain manipulations. Often he felt nausea, 
but always he felt hunger; and from time to time his hands clenched 
unconsciously in the patterns that would determine his new way of life. 


As the line of warthogs moved snuffling and grunting across the trail, 
Moon-Watcher came to a sudden halt. Pigs and man-apes had always ignored 
each other, for there was no conflict of interest between them. Like most animals 
that did not compete for the same food, they merely kept out of each other's way. 

Yet now Moon-Watcher stood looking at them, wavering back and forth 
uncertainly as he was buffeted by impulses which he could not understand, 
Then, as if in a dream, he started searching the ground - though for what, he 



could not have explained even if he had had the power of speech. He would 
recognize it when he saw it. 

It was a heavy, pointed stone about six inches long, and though it did not 
fit his hand perfectly, it would do. As he swung his hand around, puzzled by its 
suddenly increased weight, he felt a pleasing sense of power and authority. He 
started to move toward the nearest pig. 

It was a young and foolish animal, even by the undemanding standards of 
warthog intelligence. Though it observed him out of the corner of its eye, it did 
not take him seriously until much too late. Why should it suspect these harmless 
creatures of any evil intent? It went on rooting up the grass until Moon-Watcher's 
stone hammer obliterated its dim consciousness. The remainder of the herd 
continued grazing unalarmed, for the murder had been swift and silent. 

All the other man-apes in the group had stopped to watch, and now they 
crowded round Moon-Watcher and his victim with admiring wonder. Presently 
one of them picked up the blood-stained weapon, and began to pound the dead 
pig. Others joined in with any sticks and stones that they could gather, until theirt 
target began a messy disintegration. 

Then they became bored; some wandered off, while others stood hesitantly 
around the unrecognizable corpse - the future of a world waiting upon their 
decision. It was a surprisingly long time before one of the nursing females began 
to lick the gory stone she was holding in her paws. 

And it was longer stili before Moon-Watcher, despite all that he had been 
shown, really understood that he need never be hungry again. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

4 - The Leopard 


The tools they had been programmed to use were simple enough, yet they 
could change this world and make the man-apes its masters. The most primitive 
was the hand-held stone, that multiplied manyfold the power of a blow. Then 
there was the bone club, that lengthened the reach and could provide a buffer 
against the fangs or claws of angry animals. With these weapons, the limitless 
food that roamed the savannas was theirs to take. 

But they needed other aids, for their teeth and nails could not readily 
dismember anything larger than a rabbit, Luckily, Nature had provided the 
perfect tools, requiring only the wit to pick them up; First there was a crude but 
very efficient knife or saw, of a model that would serve well for the next three 
million years. It was simply the lower jawbone of an antelope, with the teeth stili 
in place; there would be no substantial improvement until the coming of Steel. 
Then there was an awl or dagger in the form of a gazelle horn, and finally a 
scraping tool made from the complete jaw of almost any small animal. 

The stone club, the toothed saw, the horn dagger, the bone scraper - these 
were the marvelous inventions which the man-apes needed in order to survive. 
Soon they would recognize them for the symbols of power that they were, but 
many months must pass before their clumsy fingers had acquired the skill - or 
the will - to use them. 

Perhaps, given time, they might by their own efforts have come to the 
awesome and brilliant concept of using natural weapons as artificial tools. But 
the odds were all against them, and even now there were endless opportunities 
for failure in the ages that lay ahead. 

The man-apes had been given their first chance. There would be no second 
one; the future was, very literally, in their own hands. 



Moons waxed and waned; babies were born and sometimes lived; feeble, 
toothless thirty-year-olds died; the leopard took its toll in the night; the Others 
threatened daily across the river - and the tribe prospered. In the course of a 
single year, Moon-Watcher and his companions had changed almost beyond 
recognition. 

They had learned their lessons well; now they could handle all the tools 
that had been revealed to them. The very memory of hunger was fading from 
their minds; and though the warthogs were becoming shy, there were gazelles 
and antelopes and zebras in countless thousands on the plains. All these animals, 
and others, had fallen prey to the apprentice hunters. 

Now that they were no longer half-numbed with starvation, they had time 
both for leisure and for the first rudiments of thought. Their new way of life was 
now casually accepted, and they did not associate it in any way with the 
monolith stili standing beside the trail to the river. If they had ever stopped to 
consider the matter, they might have boasted that they had brought about their 
improved status by their own efforts; in fact, they had already forgotten any 
other mode of existence. 

But no Utopia is perfect, and this one had two blemishes. The first was the 
marauding leopard, whose passion for man-apes seemed to have grown even 
stronger now that they were better nourished. The second was the tribe across 
the river; for somehow the Others had survived, and had stubbornly refused to 
die of starvation. 

The leopard problem was resolved partly by chance, partly owing to a 
serious - indeed almost fatal - error on Moon-Watcher's part. Yet at the time his 
idea had seemed such a brilliant one that he had danced with joy, and perhaps he 
could hardly be blamed for overlooking the consequences. 

The tribe stili experienced occasional bad days, though these no longer 
threatened its very survival. Toward dusk, it had failed to make a kill; the horne 
caves were already in sight as Moon-Watcher led his tired and disgruntled 
companions back to shelter. And there, on their very threshold, they found one of 
nature's rare bonanzas. A full-grown antelope was lying by the trail. Its foreleg 



was broken, but it stili had plenty of fight in it, and the circling jackals gave its 
daggerlike horns a respectful berth. They could afford to wait; they knew that 
they had only to bide their time. But they had forgotten about the competition, 
and retreated with angry snarls when the man-apes arrived. 

They too circled warily, keeping beyond the range of those dangerous 
horns; then they moved to the attack with clubs and stones. 

It was not a very effective or coordinated attack; by the time the wretched 
beast had been given its quietus the light had almost gone - and the jackals were 
regaining their courage. Moon-Watcher, torn between fear and hunger, slowly 
realized that all this effort might have been in vain. It was too dangerous to stay 
here any longer. 

Then, not for the first or the last time, he proved himself a genius. With an 
immense effort of imagination, he visualized the dead antelope - in the safety of 
his own cave. He began to drag it toward the cliff face; presently, the others 
understood his intentions, and began to help him. 

If he had known how difficult the task would be, he would never have 
attempted it. Only his great strength, and the agility inherited from his arboreal 
ancestors allowed him to haul the carcass up the steep slope. Several times, 
weeping with frustration, he almost abandoned his prize, but a stubbornness as 
deep-seated as his hunger drove him on. Sometimes the others helped him, 
sometimes they hindered; more often, they merely got in the way. But finally it 
was done; the battered antelope was dragged over the lip of the cave, as the last 
hues of sunlight faded from the sky; and the feasting began. 

Hours later, gorged to repletion, Moon-Watcher awoke. Not knowing why, 
he sat up in the darkness among the sprawled bodies of his equally satiated 
companions, and strained his ears into the night. 

There was no sound except the heavy breathing around him; the whole 
world seemed asleep. The rocks beyond the mouth of the cave were pale as bone 
in the brilliant light from the moon, now high overhead. Any thought of danger 
seemed infinitely remote. 

Then, from a long way off, came the sound of a falling pebble. Fearful, yet 
inquisitive, Moon-Watcher crawled out onto the ledge of the cave and peered 



down the face of the cliff. 


What he saw left him so paralyzed with fright that for long seconds he was 
unable to move. Only twenty feet below, two gleaming golden eyes were staring 
straight up at him; they held him so hypnotized with fear that he was scarcely 
aware of the lithe, streaked body behind them, flowing smoothly and silently 
from rock to rock. Never before had the leopard climbed so high. It had ignored 
the lower caves, though it must have been well aware of their inhabitants. Now it 
was after other game; it was following the spoor of blood, up the moon-washed 
face of the cliff. 

Seconds later, the night was made hideous by the shrieks of alarm from the 
man-apes in the cave above. The leopard gave a snarl of fury as it realized that it 
had lost the element of surprise. But it did not check its advance, for it knew that 
it had nothing to fear. 

It reached the ledge, and rested for a moment on the narrow open space. 
The scent of blood was all around, filling its fierce and tiny mind with one 
overwhelming desire. Without hesitation, it padded silently into the cave. 

And here it made its first error, for as it moved out of the moonlight even 
its superbly night-adapted eyes were at a momentary disadvantage. The man- 
apes could see it, partly silhouetted against the opening of the cave, more clearly 
than it could see them. They were terrified, but they were no longer utterly 
helpless. 

Snarling and lashing its tail in arrogant confidence, the leopard advanced 
in search of the tender food that it craved. Had it met its prey in the open, it 
would have had no problems; but now that the man-apes were trapped, 
desperation had given them the courage to attempt the impossible. And for the 
first time they had the means to achieve it. 

The leopard knew that something was wrong when it felt a stunning blow 
on its head. It lashed out with its forepaw, and heard a shriek of agony as its 
claws slashed through soft flesh. Then there was a piercing pain as something 
sharp drove into its flanks - once, twice, and yet a third time. It whirled around 
to strike at the shadows screaming and dancing on all sides. 

Again there was a violent blow as something caught it across the snout. Its 



teeth snapped on a white, moving blur - only to grate uselesssly upon dead bone. 
And now - in a final, unbelievable indignity - its tail was being dragged out by 
the roots. 

It whirled around, throwing its insanely daring tormentor against the wall 
of the cave. Yet whatever it did, it could not escape the rain of blows, inflicted 
on it by crude weapons wielded by clumsy but powerful hands. Its snarls ran the 
gamut from pain to alarm, from alarm to outright terror. The implacable hunter 
was now the victim, and was desperately trying to retreat. 

And then it made its second mistake, for in its surprise and fright it had 
forgotten where it was. Or perhaps it had been dazed or blinded by the blows 
rained on its head; whatever the case, it bolted abruptly from the cave. There was 
a horrible screech as it went toppling out into space. Ages later, it seemed, there 
came a thud as it crashed into an outcropping halfway down the cliff; thereafter, 
the only sound was the sliding of loose stones, which quickly died away into the 
night. 


For a long time, intoxicated by victory, Moon-Watcher stood dancing and 
gibbering at the entrance of the cave. He rightly sensed that his whole world had 
changed and that he was no longer a powerless victim of the forces around him. 

Then he went back into the cave and, for the first time in his life, had an 
unbroken night's sleep. 


In the morning, they I found the body of the leopard at the foot of the cliff. 
Even in death, it was some time before anyone dared to approach the vanquished 
monster, but presently they closed in upon it, with their bone knives and saws. 


It was very hard work, and they did no hunting that day. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

5 - Encounter in the Dawn 


As he led the tribe down to the river in the dim light of dawn, Moon- 
Watcher paused uncertainly at a familiar spot. Something, he knew, was missing; 
but what it was, he could not remember. He wasted no mental effort on the 
problem, for this morning he had more important matters on his mind. 

Like thunder and lightning and clouds and eclipses, the great block of 
crystal had departed as mysteriously as it had come. Having vanished into the 
nonexistent past, it never troubled Moon-Watcher's thoughts again. 

He would never know what it had done to him; and none of his 
companions wondered, as they gathered round him in the morning mist, why he 
had paused for a moment here on the way to the river. 


From their side of the stream, in the never-violated safety of their own 
territory, the Others first saw Moon-Watcher and a dozen males of his tribe as a 
moving frieze against the dawn sky. At once they began to scream their daily 
challenge; but this time, there was no answer. 

Steadily, purposefully - above all, silently - Moon-Watcher and his band 
descended the low hillock that overlooked the river; and as they approached, the 
Others became suddenly quiet. Their ritual rage ebbed away, to be replaced by a 
mounting fear. They were dimly aware that something had happened, and that 
this encounter was unlike all those that had ever gone before. 

The bone clubs and knives that Moon-Watcher's group carried did not 
alarm them, for they did not understand their purpose. They only knew that their 
rivals' movements were now imbued with determination, and with menaee. 



The party stopped at the water's edge, and for a moment the Others' 
courage revived. Led by One-Ear, they halfheartedly resumed their battle chant. 
It lasted only a few seconds before a vision of terror struck then dumb. 

Moon-Watcher raised his arms high into the air, revealing the burden that 
until now had been concealed by the hirsute bodies of his companions. He was 
holding a stout branch, and impaled upon it was the bloody head of the leopard. 
The mouth had been jammed open with a stick, and the great fangs gleamed a 
ghastly white in the first rays of the rising sun. 

Most of the Others were too paralyzed with fright to move; but some 
began a slow, stumbling retreat. That was all the encouragement that Moon- 
Watcher needed. Stili holding the mangled trophy above his head, he started to 
cross the stream. After a momenfs hesitation, his companions splashed after 
him. 


When Moon-Watcher reached the far side, One-Ear was stili standing his 
ground. Perhaps he was too brave or too stupid to run; perhaps he could not 
really believe that this outrage was actually happening. Coward or hero, it made 
no difference in the end, as the frozen snarl of death came crashing down upon 
his uncomprehending head. 

Shrieking with fright, the Others scattered into the bush; but presently they 
would return, and soon they would forget their lost leader. 

For a few seconds Moon-Watcher stood uncertainly above his new victim, 
trying to grasp the strange and wonderful fact that the dead leopard could kill 
again. Now he was master of the world, and he was not quite sure what to do 
next. 


But he would thinkof something. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

6 - Ascent of Man 


A new animal was abroad on the planet, spreading slowly out from the 
African heartland. It was stili so rare that a hasty census might have overlooked 
it, among the teeming billions of creatures roving over land and sea. There was 
no evidence, as yet, that it would prosper or even survive: on this world where so 
many mightier beasts had passed away, its fate stili wavered in the balance. 

In the hundred thousand years since the crystals had descended upon 
Africa, the man-apes had invented nothing. But they had started to change, and 
had developed skills which no other animal possessed. Their bone clubs had 
increased their reach and multiplied their strength; they were no longer 
defenseless against the predators with whom they had to compete. The smaller 
carnivores they could drive away from their own kills; the larger ones they could 
at least discourage, and sometimes put to flight. 

Their massive teeth were growing smaller, for they were no longer 
essential. The sharp-edged stones that could be used to dig out roots, or to cut 
and saw through tough flesh or fiber, had begun to replace them, with 
immeasurable consequences. No longer were the man-apes faced with starvation 
when their teeth became damaged or worn; even the crudest tools could add 
many years to their lives. And as their fangs diminished, the shape of their face 
started to alter; the snout receded, the massive jaw became more delicate, the 
mouth able to make more subtle sounds. Speech was stili a million years away, 
but the first steps toward it had been taken. 

And then the world began to change. In four great waves, with two 
hundred thousand years between their crests, the Ice Ages swept by, leaving their 
mark on all the globe. Outside the tropics, the glaciers slew those who had 
prematurely left theft ancestral horne; and everywhere they winnowed out the 
creatures who could not adapt. 



When the ice had passed, so had much of the planefs early life - including 
the man-apes. But, unlike so many others, they had left descendants; they had 
not merely become extinct - they had been transformed. The toolmakers had 
been remade by their own tools. 

For in using clubs and flints, their hands had developed a dexterity found 
nowhere else in the animal kingdom, permitting them to make stili better tools, 
which in turn had developed their limbs and brains yet further. It was an 
accelerating, cumulative process; and at its end was Man. 

The first true men had tools and weapons only a little better than those of 
their ancestors a million years earlier, but they could use them with far greater 
skill. 


And somewhere in the shadowy centuries that had gone before they had 
invented the most essential tool of all, though it could be neither seen nor 
touched. They had learned to speak, and so had won their first great victory over 
Time. Now the knowledge of one generation could be handed on to the next, so 
that each age could profit from those that had gone before. 

Unlike the animals, who knew only the present, Man had acquired a past; 
and he was beginning to grope toward a future. 

He was also learning to harness the forces of nature; with the taming of 
fire, he had laid the foundations of technology and left his animal origins far 
behind. Stone gave way to bronze, and then to iron. Hunting was succeeded by 
agriculture. The tribe grew into the village, the village into the town. Speech 
became eternal, thanks to certain marks on stone and clay and papyrus. Presently 
he invented philosophy, and religion. And he peopled the sky, not altogether 
inaccurately, with gods. 

As his body became more and more defenseless, so his means of offense 
became steadily more frightful. With stone and bronze and iron and Steel he had 
mn the gamut of everything that could pierce and slash, and quite early in time 
he had learned how to strike down his victims from a distance. The spear, the 
bow, the gun, and finally the guided missile had given him weapons of infinite 
range and all but infinite power. 



Without those weapons, often though he had used them against himself, 
Man would never have conquered his world. Into them he had put his heart and 
soul, and for ages they had served him well. 

But now, as long as they existed, he was living on borrowed time. 


II - TMA-1 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

7 - Special Flight 


No matter how many times you left Earth, Dr. Heywood Floyd told 
himself, the excitement never really palled. He had been to Mars once, to the 
Moon three times, and to the various space stations more often than he could 
remember. Yet as the moment of takeoff approached, he was conscious of a 
rising tension, a feeling of wonder and awe - yes; and of nervousness - which put 
him on the same level as any Earthlubber about to receive his first baptism of 
space. 


The jet that had rushed him here from Washington, after that midnight 
briefing with the President, was now dropping down toward one of the most 
familiar, yet most exciting, landscapes in all the world. There lay the first two 
generations of the Space Age, spanning twenty miles of the Florida coast to the 
south, outlined by winking red warning lights, were the giant gantries of the 
Saturns and Neptunes, that had set men on the path to the planets, and had now 
passed into history. Near the horizon, a gleaming silver tower bathed in 
floodlights, stood the last of the Saturn V's, for almost twenty years a national 
monument and place of pilgrimage. Not far away, looming against the sky like a 
man-made mountain, was the incredible bulk of the Vehicle Assembly Building, 
stili the largest single structure on Earth. 

But these things now belonged to the past, and he was flying toward the 
future. As they banked, Dr. Floyd could see below him a maze of buildings, then 
a great airstrip, then a broad, dead-straight scar across the fiat Florida landscape 
- the multiple rails of a giant launch-lug track. At its end, surrounded by vehicle s 
and gantries, a spaceplane lay gleaming in a pool of light, being prepared for its 
leap to the stars. In a sudden failure of perspective, brought on by his swift 
changes of speed and height, it seemed to Floyd that he was looking down on a 
small silver moth, caught in the beam of a flashlight. 



Then the tiny, scurrying figures on the ground brought home to him the 
real size of the spacecraft; it must have been two hundred feet across the narrow 
V of its wings. 

And that enormous vehicle, Floyd told himself with some incredulity - yet 
also with some pride - is waiting for me. As far as he knew, it was the first time 
that an entire mission had been set up to take a single man to the Moon. 

Though, it was two o'clock in the morning, a group of reporters and 
cameramen intercepted him on his way to the floodlit Orion III spacecraft. He 
knew several of them by sight, for as Chairman of the National Council of 
Astronautics, the news conference was part of his way of life. This was neither 
the time nor the place for one, and he had nothing to say; but it was important 
not to offend the gentlemen of the Communications media. 

“Dr. Floyd? I'm Jim Forster of Associated News. Could you give us a few 
words about this flight of yours?” 

“Fm very sorry -1 can't say anything.” 

“But you did meet with the President earlier this evening?” asked a 
familiar voice. 

“Oh - hello, Mike. I'm afraid you've been dragged out of bed for nothing. 
Definitely no comment.” 

“Can you at least confirm or deny that some kind of epidemic has broken 
out on the Moon?” a TV reporter asked, managing to jog alongside and keep 
Floyd properly framed in his miniature TV camera. 

“Sorry,” said Floyd, shaking his head. 

“What about the quarantine?” asked another reporter. “How long will it be 
kepton?” 

“Stili no comment.” 

“Dr. Floyd,” demanded a very short and determined lady of the press, 
“what possible justification can there be for this total blackout of news from the 



Moon? Has it anything to do with the political situation?” 


“What political situation?” Floyd asked dryly. There was a sprinkle of 
laughter, and someone called, “Have a good trip, Doctor!” as he made his way 
into the sanctuary of the boarding gantry. 

As long, as he could remember, it had been not a “situation” so much as a 
permanent crisis. Since the 1970s, the world had been dominated by two 
problems which, ironically, tended to cancel each other out. 

Though birth control was cheap, reliable, and endorsed by all the main 
religions, it had come too late; the population of the world was now six billion - 
a third of them in the Chinese Empire. Laws had even been passed in some 
authoritarian societies limiting families to two children, but their enforcement 
had proved impracticable. As a resuit, food was short in every country; even the 
United States had meatless days, and widespread famine was predicted within 
fifteen years, despite heroic efforts to farm the sea and to develop synthetic 
foods. 


With the need for international cooperation more urgent than ever, there 
were stili as many frontiers as in any earlier age. In a million years, the human 
race had lost few of its aggressive instincts; along symbolic lines visible only to 
politicians, the thirty-eight nuclear powers watched one another with belligerent 
anxiety. Among them, they possessed sufficient megatonnage to remove the 
entire surface crust of the planet. Although there had been - miraculously - no 
use of atomic weapons, this situation could hardly last forever. 

And now, for their own inscrutable reasons, the Chinese were offering to 
the smallest have-not nations a complete nuclear capability of fifty warheads and 
delivery systems. The cost was under $200,000,000, and easy terms could be 
arranged. 

Perhaps they were only trying to shore up their sagging economy, by 
turning obsolete weapons systems into hard cash, as some observers had 
suggested. Or perhaps they had discovered methods of warfare so advanced that 
they no longer had need of such toys; there had been talk of radio-hypnosis from 
satellite transmitters, compulsion viruses, and blackmail by synthetic diseases 
for which they alone possessed the antidote. 



These charming ideas were almost certainly propaganda or pure fantasy, 
but it was not safe to discount any of them. Every time Floyd took off from 
Earth, he wondered if it would stili be there when the time came to return. 

The trim stewardess greeted him as he entered the cabin. “Good morning, 
Dr. Floyd. I'm Miss Simmons - I'd like to welcome you aboard on behalf of 
Captain Tynes and our copilot, First Officer Ballard.” 

“Thank you,” said Floyd with a smile, wondering why stewardesses 
always had to sound like robot tour guides. 

“Takeoffs in five minutes,” she said, gesturing into the empty twenty- 
passenger cabin. “You can take any seat you want, but Captain Tynes 
recommends the forward window seat on the left, if you want to watch the 
docking operations.” 

“l'\\ do that,” he answered, moving toward the preferred seat. The 
stewardess fussed over him awhile and then moved to her cubicle at the rear of 
the cabin. 

Floyd settled down in his seat, adjusted the safety harness around waist 
and shoulders, and strapped his briefcase to the adjacent seat. A moment later, 
the loudspeaker came on with a soft popping noise. “Good morning,” said Miss 
Simmons' voice. “This is Special Flight 3, Kennedy to Space Station One.” 

She was determined, it seemed, to go through the full routine for her 
solitary passenger, and Floyd could not resist a smile as she continued 
inexorably. 

“Our transit time will be fifty-five minutes. Maximum acceleration will be 
two-gee, and we will be weightless for thirty minutes. Please do not leave your 
seat until the safety sign is lit.” 

Floyd looked over his shoulder and called, “Thank you.” He caught a 
glimpse of a slightly embarrassed but charming smile. 

He leaned back into his seat and relaxed. This trip, he calculated, would 
cost the taxpayers slightly over a million dollars. If it was not justified, he would 
be out of his job; but he could always go back to the university and to his 



interrupted studies of planetary formation. 


“Auto-countdown procedures all Go,” the captain's voice said over the 
speaker with the soothing singsong used in RT chat. “Lift-off in one minute.” 

As always, it seemed more like an hour. Floyd became acutely aware of 
the gigantic forces coiled up around him, waiting to be released. In the fuel tanks 
of the two spacecraft, and in the power storage system of the launching track, 
was pent up the energy of a nuclear bomb. And it would all be used to take him a 
mere two hundred miles from Earth. 

There was none of the old-fashioned FIVE-FOIJR-THREE-TWO-ONE- 
ZERO business, so tough on the human nervous system. 

“Launching in fifteen seconds. You will be more comfortable if you start 
breathing deeply.” 

That was good psychology, and good physiology. 

Floyd felt himself well charged with oxygen, and ready to tackle anything, 
when the launching track began to sling its thousand-ton payload out over the 
Atlantic. 

It was hard to teli when they lifted from the track and became airborne, 
but when the roar of the rockets suddenly doubled its fury, and Floyd found 
himself sinking deeper and deeper into the cushions of his seat, he knew that the 
first-stage engines had taken over. He wished he could look out of the window, 
but it was an effort even to turn his head, Yet there was no discomfort; indeed, 
the pressure of acceleration and the overwhelming thunder of the motors 
produced an extraordinary euphoria. His ears ringing, the blood pounding in his 
veins, Floyd felt more alive than he had for years. He was young again, he 
wanted to sing aloud - which was certainly safe, for no one could possibly hear 
him. 


The mood passed swiftly, as he suddenly realized that he was leaving 
Earth, and everything he had ever loved. Down there were his three children, 
motherless since his wife had taken that fatal flight to Europe ten years ago. (Ten 
years? Impossible! Yet it was so...) Perhaps, for their sake, he should have 
remarried. 



He had almost lost sense of time when the pressure and the noise abruptly 
slackened, and the cabin speaker announced: “Preparing to separate from lower 
stage. Here we go.” 

There was a slight jolt; and suddenly Floyd recalled a quotation of 
Leonardo da Vinci's which he had once seen displayed in a NASA office: 


The Great Bird will take its flight on the back of the great bird, bringing 
glory to the nest where it was born. 


Well, the Great Bird was flying now, beyond all the dreams of da Vinci, 
and its exhausted companion was winging back to earth. In a ten-thousand-mile 
arc, the empty lower stage would glide down into the atmosphere, trading speed 
for distance as it homed on Kennedy. In a few hours, serviced and refueled, it 
would be ready again to lift another companion toward the shining silence with 
it could never reach. 

Now, thought Floyd, we are on our own, more than halfway to orbit. 
When the acceleration came on again, as the upper stage rockets fired, the thrust 
was much more gentle: indeed, he felt no more than normal gravity. But it would 
have been impossible to walk, since “Up” was straight toward the front of the 
cabin. If he had been foolish enough to leave his seat, he would have crashed at 
once against the rear wall. 

This effect was a little disconcerting, for it seemed that the ship was 
standing on its tail. To Floyd, who was at the very front of the cabin, all the seats 
appeared to be fixed on a wall topping vertically beneath him. He was doing his 
best to ignore this uncomfortable illusion when dawn exploded outside the ship. 

In seconds, they shot through veils of crimson and pink and gold and blue 
into the piercing white of day. 


Though the Windows were heavily tinted to reduce the glare, the probing 
beams of sunlight that now slowly swept across the cabin left Floyd half-blinded 



for several minutes. He was in space, yet there was no question of being able to 
see the stars. 

He shielded his eyes with his hands and tried to peer through the window 
beside him. Out there the swept-back wing of the ship was blazing like white-hot 
metal in the reflected sunlight; there was utter darkness all around it, and that 
darkness must be full of stars - but it was impossible to see them. 

Weight was slowly ebbing; the rockets were being throttled back as the 
ship eased itself into orbit. The thunder of the engines dropped to a muted roar, 
then a gentle hiss, then died into silence. If it had not been for the restraining 
straps, Floyd would have floated out of his seat; his stomach felt as if it was 
going to do so anyway. He hoped that the pilis he had been given half an hour 
and ten thousand miles ago would perform as per specifications. He had been 
spacesick just once in his career, and that was much too often. 

The pilot's voice was firm and confident as it came over the cabin speaker. 
“Please observe all Zero-gee regulations. We will be docking at Space Station 
One in forty-five minutes.” 

The stewardess came walking up the narrow corridor to the right of the 
closely spaced seats. There was a slight buoyancy about her steps, and her feet 
came away from the floor reluctantly as if entangled in glue. She was keeping to 
the bright yellow band of Velcro carpeting that ran the full length of the floor - 
and of the ceiling. The carpet, and the soles of her sandals, were covered with 
myriads of tiny hooks, so that they clung together like burrs. This trick of 
walking in free fall was immensely reassuring to disoriented passengers. 

“Would you like some coffee or tea, Dr. Floyd?” she asked cheerfully. 

“No thank you,” he smiled. He always felt like a baby when he had to 
suck at one of those plastic drinking tubes. 

The stewardess was stili hovering anxiously around him as he popped 
open his briefcase and prepared to remove his papers. 

“Dr. Floyd, may I ask you a question?” 


“Certainly,” he answered, looking up over his glasses. “My fiance is a 



geologist at Clavius,” said Miss Simmons, measuring her words carefully, “and I 
haven't heard from him for over a week.” 

‘Tm sorry to hear that; maybe he's away from his base, and out of touch.” 

She shook her head. “He always telis me when that's going to happen. And 
you can imagine how worried I am - with all these rumors. Is it really true about 
an epidemic on the Moon?” 

“If it is, there's no cause for alarm.. Remember, there was a quarantine 
back in '98, over that mutated flu virus. A lot of people were sick - but no one 
died, And that's really all I can say,” he concluded firmly. 

Miss Simmons smiled pleasantly and straightened up. “Well, thank you 
anyway, Doctor. I'm sorry to have bothered you.” 

“No bother at all,” he said gallantly, but not very accurately. Then he 
buried himself in his endless technical reports, in a desperate last-minute assault 
on the usual backlog; 

He would have no time for reading when he got to the Moon. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

8 - Orbital Rendezvous 


Half an hour later the pilot announced: “We make contact in ten minutes. 
Please check your seat harness.” 

Floyd obeyed, and put away his papers. It was asking for trouble to read 
during the celestial juggling act which took place during the last 300 miles; best 
to close one's eyes and relax while the spacecraft was nudged back and forth 
with brief bursts of rocket power. 

A few minutes later he caught his first glimpse of Space Station One, only 
a few miles away. The sunlight glinted and sparkled from the polished metal 
surfaces of the slowly revolving, three-hundred-yard-diameter disk. Not far 
away, drifting in the same orbit, was a sweptback Titov-V spaceplane, and close 
to that an almost spherical Aries-IB, the workhorse of space, with the four 
stubby legs of its lunar-landing shock absorbers jutting from one side. 

The Orion III spacecraft was descending from a higher orbit, which 
brought the Earth into spectacular view behind the Station. From his altitude of 
200 miles, Floyd could see much of Africa and the Atlantic Ocean. There was 
considerable cloud cover, but he could stili detect the blue-green outlines of the 
Gold Coast. 

The Central axis of the Space Station, with its docking arms extended, was 
now slowly swimming toward them. Unlike the structure from which it sprang, it 
was not rotating - or, rather, it was running in reverse at a rate which exactly 
countered the Station's own spin. Thus a visiting spacecraft could be coupled to 
it, for the transfer of personnel or cargo, without being whirled disastrously 
around. 


With the softest of thuds, ship and Station made contact. There were 



metallic, scratching noises from outside, then the brief hissing of air as pressures 
equalized. 

A few seconds later the airlock door opened, and a man wearing the light, 
close-fitting slacks and short-sleeved shirt which was almost the uniform of 
Space Station personnel came into the cabin. 

“Pleased to meet you, Dr. Floyd. I'm Nick Miller, Station Security; I'm to 
look after you until the shuttle leaves.” 

They shook hands, then Floyd smiled at the stewardess and said: “Please 
give my compliments to Captain Tynes, and thank him for the smooth ride. 
Perhaps IT1 see you on the way horne.” 

Very cautiously - it was more than a year since he had last been weightless 
and it would be some time before he regained his spacelegs - he hauled himself 
hand over hand through the airlock and into the large, circular chamber at the 
axis of the Space Station. It was a heavily padded room, its walls covered with 
recessed handholds; Floyd gripped one of these firmly while the whole chamber 
started to rotate, until it matched the spin of the Station. 

As it gained speed, faint and ghostly gravitational fingers began to clutch 
at him, and he drifted slowly toward the circular wall. Now he was standing, 
swaying back and forth gently like seaweed in the surge of the tide, on what had 
magically become a curving floor. The centrifugal force of the Station's spin had 
taken hold of him; it was very feeble here, so near the axis, but would increase 
steadily as he moved outward. 

From the Central transit chamber he followed Miller down a curving stair. 
At first his weight was so slight that he had almost to force himself downward 
by holding on to the handrail. Not until he reached the passenger lounge, on the 
outer skin of the great revolving disk, had he acquired enough weight to move 
around almost normally. 

The lounge had been redecorated since his last visit, and had acquired 
several new facilities. Besides the usual chairs, small tables, restaurant, and post 
office there were now a barber shop, drugstore, movie theater and a souvenir 
shop selling photographs and slides of lunar and planetary landscapes, 
guaranteed genuine pieces of Luniks, Rangers, and Surveyors, all neatly 



mounted in plastic, and exorbitandy priced. 


“Can I get you anything while we're waiting?” Miller asked. "We board in 
about thirty minutes?' 

“I could do with a cup of black coffee - two lumps - and I'd like to call 

Earth.” 


“Right, Doctor - I'll get the coffee - the phones are over there.” 

The picturesque booths were only a few yards from a barrier with two 
entrances labeled WELCOME TO THE U.S. SECTION and WELCOME TO 
THE SOVIET SECTION. 

Beneath these were notices which read, in English, Russian, and Chinese, 
French, German, and Spanish. 


PLEASE HAVE READY YOUR: 

Passport 

Visa 

Medical Certificate 
Transportation Permit 
Weight Declaration 


There was a rather pleasant symbolism about the fact that as soon as they 
had passed through the barriers, in either direction, passengers were free to mix 
again. The division was purely for administrative purposes. 

Floyd, after checking that the Area Code for the United States was stili 81, 
punched his twelve-digit home number, dropped his plastic all-purpose credit 



card into the pay siot, and was through in thirty seconds. 


Washington was stili sleeping, for it was several hours to dawn, but he 
would not disturb anyone. His housekeeper would get the message from the 
recorder as soon as she awoke. 

“Miss Flemming - this is Dr. Floyd. Sorry I had to leave in such a hurry. 
Would you please call my office and ask them to collect the car - it's at Dulles 
Airport and the key is with Mr. Bailey, Senior Flight Control Officer. Next, will 
you call the Chevy Chase Country Club and leave a message for the secretary. I 
definitely won't be able to play in the tennis tournament next weekend. Give my 
apologies - I'm afraid they were counting on me. Then call Downtown 
Electronies and teli them that if the video in my study isn't fixed by - oh, 
Wednesday - they can take the damn thing back.” He paused for breath, and tried 
to think of any other crises or problems that might arise during the days ahead. 

“If you run short of cash, speak to the office; they can get urgent messages 
to me, but I may be too busy to answer. Give my love to the children, and say I'll 
be back as soon as I can. Oh, hell - here's someone I don't want to see - I'll call 
from the Moon if I can - good-bye.” 

Floyd tried to duck out of the booth, but it was too late; he had already 
been spotted. Bearing down on him through the Soviet Section exit was Dr. 
Dimitri Moisevitch, of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Science. Dimitri was one of 
Floyd's best friends; and for that very reason, he was the last person he wished to 
talk to, here and now. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

9 - Moon Shuttle 


The Russian astronomer was tali, slender, and blond, and his unlined face 
belied his fifty-five years - the last ten of which had been spent building up the 
giant radio observatory on the far side of the Moon, where two thousand miles of 
solid rock would shield it from the eletronic racket of Earth. 

“Why, Heywood,” he said, shaking hands firmly. “It's a small universe... 
How are you - and your charming children?” 

“We're fine,” Floyd replied warmly, but with a slightly distracted air. “We 
often talk about the wonderful time you gave us last summer.” He was sorry he 
could not sound more sincere; they really had enjoyed a week's vacation in 
Odessa with Dimitri during one of the Russian's visits to Earth. 

“And you -1 suppose you're on your way up?” Dimitri inquired. 

“Er, yes - my flight leaves in half an hour,” answered Floyd. “Do you 
know Mr. Miller?” 

The Security Officer had now approached, and was standing at a 
respectful distance holding a plastic cup full of coffee. 

“Of course. But please put that down, Mr. Miller. This is Dr. Floyd's last 
chance to have a civilized drink - let's not waste it. No -1 insist.” 

They followed Dimitri out of the main lounge into the observation section, 
and soon were sitting at a table under a dim light watching the moving panorama 
of the stars. Space Station One revolved once a minute, and the centrifugal force 
generated by this slow spin produced an artificial gravity equal to the Moon's. 
This, it had been discovered, was a good compromise between Earth gravity and 



no gravity at ali; moreover, it gave moon-bound passengers a chance to become 
acclimatized. 

Outside the almost invisible Windows, Earth and stars marched in a silent 
procession. At the moment, this side of the Station was tilted away from the sun; 
otherwise, it would have been impossible to look out, for the lounge would have 
been blasted with light. Even as it was, the glare of the Earth, filling half the sky, 
drowned all but the brighter stars. 

But Earth was waning, as the Station orbited toward the night side of the 
planet; in a few minutes it would be a huge black disk, spangled with the lights 
of cities. And then the sky would belong to the stars. 

“Now,” said Dimitri, after he had swiftly downed his first drink and was 
toying with the second, “what's all this about an epidemic in the U.S. Sector? I 
wanted to go there on this trip. 'No, Professor,' they told me. 'We're very sorry, 
but there's a striet quarantine until further notice.' I pulled all the strings I could; 
It was no use. Now you teli me what's happening.” 

Floyd groaned inwardly. Here we go again, he said. The sooner I'm on that 
shuttle, headed for the Moon, the happier I'll be. 

“The - ah - quarantine is purely a safety precaution,” he said cautiously. 
'We're not even sure it's really necessary, but we don't believe in taking chances." 

“But what is the disease - what are the symptoms? Could it be 
extraterrestrial? Do you want any help from our medical Services?” 

“I'm sorry, Dimitri - we've been asked not to say anything at the moment. 
Thanks for the offer, but we can handle the situation.” 

“Hmm,” said Moisevitch, obviously quite unconvinced. “Seems odd to me 
that you, an astronomer, should be sent up to the Moon to look into an 
epidemic.” 

“I'm only an ex-astronomer; it's years since I did any real research. Now 
I'm a scientific expert; that means I know nothing about absolutely everything.” 

“Then do you know what TMA-1 means?” 



Miller seemed about to choke on his drink, but Floyd was made of sterner 
stuff. He looked his old friend straight in the eye, and said calmly: “TMA-1? 
What an odd expression. Where did you hear it?” 

“Never mind,” retorted the Russian. “You can't fool me. But if you've run 
into something you can't handle, I hope you don't leave it until too late before 
you yell for help.” 

Miller looked meaningfully at his watch. 

“Due to board in five minutes, Dr. Floyd,” he said. “I think we'd better get 
moving.” 

Though he knew that they stili had a good twenty minutes, Floyd got up 
with haste. Too much haste, for he had forgotten the one-sixth of a gravity. He 
grabbed the table just in time to prevent a takeoff. 

“It was fine meeting you, Dimitri,” he said, not quite accurately. “Hope 
you have a good trip down to Earth - I'll give you a call as soon as I'm back.” 

As they left the lounge, and checked through the U.S. transit barrier, 
Floyd remarked: “Phew - that was close. Thanks for rescuing me.” 

“You know, Doctor,” said the Security Officer, “I hope he isn't right.” 

“Right about what?” 

“About us running into something we can't handle.” 

“That,” Floyd answered with determination, “is what I intend to find out.” 

Forty-five minutes later, the Aries-IB lunar carrier pulled away from the 
Station. There was none of the power and fury of a takeoff from Earth - only an 
almost inaudible, far-off whistling as the low-thrust plasma jets blasted their 
electrified streams into space. The gentle push lasted for more than fifteen 
minutes, and the mild acceleration would not have prevented anyone from 
moving around the cabin. But when it was over, the ship was no longer bound to 
Earth, as it had been while it stili accompanied the Station. It had broken the 



bonds of gravity and was now a free and independent planet, circling the sun in 
an orbit of its own. 

The cabin Floyd now had all to himself had been designed for thirty 
passengers. It was strange, and rather lonely, to see all the empty seats around 
him, and to have the undivided attention of the steward and stewardess - not to 
mention pilot, copilot, and two engineers. He doubted that any man in history 
had ever received such exclusive Service, and it was most unlikely that anyone 
would do so in the future. He recalled the cynical remark of one of the less 
reputable pontiffs: “Now that we have the papacy, let us enjoy it.” Well, he 
would enjoy this tip, and the euphoria of weightlessness. With the loss of gravity 
he had - at least for a while - shed most of his cares. Someone had once said that 
you could be terrified in space, but you could not be worried there. It was 
perfectly true. 

The stewards, it appeared, were determined to make him eat for the whole 
twenty-five hours of the trip, and he was continually fending off unwanted 
meals. Eating in zero gravity was no real problem, contrary to the dark 
forebodings of the early astronauts. He sat at an ordinary table, to which the 
plates were clipped, as aboard ship in a rough sea. All the courses had some 
element of stickiness, so that they would not take off and go wandering round 
the cabin. Thus a chop would be glued to the piate by a thick sauce, and a salad 
kept under control by an adhesive dressing. With a little skill and care there were 
few items that could not be tackled safely; the only things banned were hot soups 
and excessively crumbly pastries. Drinks of course, were a different matter; all 
liquids simply had to be kept in plastic squeeze tubes. 

A whole generation of research by heroic but unsung volunteers had gone 
into the design of the washroom, and it was now considered to be more or less 
foolproof. Floyd investigated it soon after free fall had begun. He found himself 
in a little cubicle with all the fittings of an ordinary airline toilet, but illuminated 
with a red light that was very harsh and unpleasant to the eye. A notice printed in 
prominent letters announced: MOST IMPORTANT! FOR YOUR OWN 
COMFORT, PLEASE RE AD THESE INSTRUCTIONS CAREFULLY! 

Floyd sat down (one stili tended to do so, even when weightless) and read 
the notice several times. When he was sure that there had been no modifications 
since his last trip, he pressed the START button. 



Close at hand, an electric motor began to whirr, and Floyd felt himself 
moving. As the notice advised him to do, he closed his eyes and waited. After a 
minute, a bell chimed softly and he looked around. 

The light had now changed to a soothing pinkish-white; but, more 
important, he was under gravity again. 

Only the faintest vibration revealed that it was a spurious gravity, caused 
by the carrousel-like spin of the whole toilet compartment. Floyd picked up a 
piece of soap, and watched it drop in slow motion; he judged that the centrifugal 
force was about a quarter of a normal gravity. But that was quite enough; it 
would ensure that everything moved in the right direction, in the one place 
where this mattered most. 

He pressed the STOP FOR EXIT button, and closed his eyes again. Weight 
slowly ebbed as the rotation ceased, the bell gave a double chime, and the red 
warning light was back. The door was then locked in the right position to let him 
glide out into the cabin, where he adhered as quickly as possible to the carpet. 
He had long ago exhausted the novelty of weightlessness, and was grateful for 
the Velcro slippers that allowed him to walk almost normally. 

There was plenty to occupy his time, even if he did nothing but sit and 
read. When he tired of official reports and memoranda and minutes, he would 
plug his foolscap-sized Newspad into the ship's information Circuit and scan the 
latest reports from Earth. One by one he would conjure up the world's major 
electronic papers; he knew the codes of the more important ones by heart, and 
had no need to consuit the list on the back of his pad. Switching to the display 
unit's short-term memory, he would hold the front page while he quickly 
searched the headlines and noted the items that interested him. 

Each had its own two-digit reference; when he punched that, the postage- 
stamp-sized rectangle would expand until it neatly filled the screen and he could 
read it with comfort. When he had finished, he would flash back to the complete 
page and select a new subject for detailed examination. 

Floyd sometimes wondered if the Newspad, and the fantastic technology 
behind it, was the last word in man's quest for perfect Communications. Here he 
was, far out in space, speeding away from Earth at thousands of miles an hour, 
yet in a few milliseconds he could see the headlines of any newspaper he 



pleased. (That very word “newspaper,” of course, was an anachronistic hangover 
into the age of electronics.) The text was updated automatically on every hour; 
even if one read only the English versions, one could spend an entire lifetime 
doing nothing but absorbing the ever-changing flow of Information from the 
news satellites. 

It was hard to imagine how the system could be improved or made more 
convenient. But sooner or later, Floyd guessed, it would pass away, to be 
replaced by something as unimaginable as the Newspad itself would have been 
to Caxton or Gutenberg. 

There was another thought which a scanning of those tiny electronic 
headlines often invoked. The more wonderful the means of communication, the 
more trivial, tawdry, or depressing its contents seemed to be. Accidents, crimes, 
natural and man-made disasters, threats of conflict, gloomy editorials - these stili 
seemed to be the main concern of the millions of words being sprayed into the 
ether. Yet Floyd also wondered if this was altogether a bad thing; the newspapers 
of Utopia, he had long ago decided, would be terribly dull. 

From time to time the captain and the other members of the crew came 
into the cabin and exchanged a few words with him. They treated their 
distinguished passenger with awe, and were doubtless burning with curiosity 
about his mission, but were too polite to ask any questions or even to drop any 
hints. 


Only the charming little stewardess seemed completely at ease in his 
presence. As Floyd quickly discovered, she came from Bali, and had carried 
beyond the atmosphere some of the grace and mystery of that stili largely 
unspoiled island. One of his strangest, and most enchanting, memories of the 
entire trip was her zero-gravity demonstration of some classical Balinese dance 
movements, with the lovely, blue-green crescent of the waning Earth as a 
backdrop. 

There was one sleep period, when the main cabin lights were switched off 
and Floyd fastened down his arms and legs with the elastic sheets that would 
prevent him from drifting away into space. It seemed a crude arrangement - but 
here in zero gravity his unpadded couch was more comfortable than the most 
luxurious mattress on Earth. 



When he had strapped himself in, Floyd dozed off quickly enough, but 
woke up once in a drowsy, half-conscious condition, to be completely baffled by 
his strange surroundings. For a moment he thought that be was in the middle of 
some dimly lit Chinese lantern; the faint glow from the other cubicles around 
him gave that impression. Then he said to himself, firmly and successfully: “Go 
to sleep, boy. This is just an ordinary moon shuttle.” 

When he awoke, the Moon had swallowed up half the sky, and the braking 
maneuvers were about to begin. 

The wide arc of Windows set in the curving wall of the passenger section 
now looked out onto the open sky, not the approaching globe, so he moved into 
the control cabin. Here, on the rear-view TV screens, he could watch the final 
stages of the descent. 

The approaching lunar mountains were utterly unlike those of Earth; they 
lacked the dazzling caps of snow, the green, close-fitting garments of vegetation, 
the moving crowns of cloud, Nevertheless, the fierce contrasts of light and 
shadow gave them a strange beauty of their own. The laws of earthly aesthetics 
did not apply here; this world had been shaped and molded by other than 
terrestrial forces, operating over eons of time unknown to the young, verdant 
Earth, with its fleeting Ice Ages, its swiftly rising and falling seas, its mountain 
ranges dissolving like mists before the dawn. Here was age inconceivable - but 
not death, for the Moon had never lived - until now. 

The descending ship was poised almost above the line dividing night from 
day, and directly below was a chaos of jagged shadows and brilliant, isolated 
peaks catching the first light of the slow lunar dawn. That would be a fearful 
place to attempt a landing, even with all possible electronic aids; but they were 
slowly drifting away from it, toward the night side of the Moon. 

Then Floyd saw, as his eyes grew more accustomed to the fainter 
illumination, that the night land was not wholly dark. It was aglow with a 
ghostly light, in which peaks and valleys and plains could be clearly seen. The 
Earth, a giant moon to the Moon, was flooding the land below with its radiance. 

On the pilot's panel, lights flashed above radar screens, numbers came and 
went on computer displays, clocking off the distance of the approaching Moon. 
They were stili more than a thousand miles away when weight returned as the 



jets began their gentle but steady deceleration. For ages, it seemed, the Moon 
slowly expanded across the sky, the sun sank below the horizon, and at last a 
single giant crater filled the field of view. 

The shuttle was falling toward its Central peaks - and suddenly Floyd 
noticed that near one of those peaks a brilliant light was flashing with a regular 
rhythm. It might have been an airport beacon back on Earth, and he stared at it 
with a tightening of the throat. It was proof that men had established another 
foothold on the Moon. 

Now the crater had expanded so much that its ramparts were slipping 
below the horizon, and the smaller craterlets that peppered its interior were 
beginning to disclose their real size. Some of these, tiny though they had seemed 
from far out in space, were miles across, and could have swallowed whole cities. 

Under its automatic Controls, the shuttle was sliding down the starlit sky, 
toward that barren landscape glimmering in the light of the great gibbous Earth. 
Now a voice was calling somewhere above the whistle of the jets and the 
electronic beepings that came and went through the cabin. 

“Clavius Control to Special 14, you are coming in nicely. Please make 
manual check of landing-gear lock, hydraulic pressure, shock-pad inflation.” 

The pilot pressed sundry switches, green lights flashed, and he called 
back, “All manual checks completed. Landing-gear lock, hydraulic pressure, 
shock pad O.K.” 

“Confirmed,” said the Moon, and the descent continued wordlessly. 
Though there was stili plenty of talking, it was all being done by machines, 
flashing binary impulses to one another at a thousand times the rate their slow- 
thinking makers could communicate. 

Some of the mountain peaks were already towering above the shuttle; now 
the ground was only a few thousand feet away, and the beacon light was a 
brilliant star, flashing steadily above a group of low buildings and odd vehicles. 
In the final stage of the descent, the jets seemed to be playing some strange tune; 
they pulsed on and off, making the last fine adjustments to the thrust. 


Abruptly, a swirling cloud of dust hid everything, the jets gave one final 



spurt, and the shuttle rocked very slightly, like a rowboat when a small wave 
goes by. It was some minutes before Floyd could really accept the silence that 
now enfolded him and the weak gravity that gripped his limbs. 

He had made, utterly without incident and in little more than one day, the 
incredible journey of which men had dreamed for two thousand years. After a 
normal routine flight, he had landed on the Moon. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

10 - Clavius Base 


Clavius, 150 miles in diameter, is the second largest crater on the visible 
face of the Moon, and lies in the center of the Southern Highlands. It is very old; 
ages of vulcanism and bombardment from space have scarred its walls and 
pockmarked its floor. But since the last era of crater formation, when the debris 
from the asteroid belt was stili battering the inner planets, it had known peace for 
half a billion years. 

Now there were new, strange stirrings on and below its surface, for here 
Man was establishing his first permanent bridgehead on the Moon. Clavius Base 
could, in an emergency, be entirely self-supporting. All the necessities of life 
were produced from the local rocks, - after they had been crushed, heated, and 
chemically processed. Hydrogen, oxygen; carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus - all 
these, and most of the other elements, could be found inside the Moon, if one 
knew where to look for them. The Base was a closed system, like a tiny working 
model of Earth itself, recycling all the Chemicals of life. The atmosphere was 
purified in a vast “hothouse” - a large, circular room buried just below the lunar 
surface. Under blazing lamps by night, and filtered sunlight by day, acres of 
stubby green plants grew in a warm, moist atmosphere. They were special 
mutations, designed for the express purpose of replenishing the air with oxygen, 
and providing food as a by-product. More food was produced by Chemical 
Processing systems and algae culture. Although the green scum circulating 
through yards of transparent plastic tubes would scarcely have appealed to a 
gourmet, the biochemists could convert it into chops and steaks only an expert 
could distinguish from the real thing. 

The eleven hundred men and six hundred women who made up the 
personnel of the Base were all highly trained scientists or technicians, carefully 
selected before they had left Earth. Though lunar living was now virtually free 
from the hardships, disadvantages, and occasional dangers of the early days, it 



was stili psychologically demanding, and not recommended for anyone suffering 
from claustrophobia. Since it was expensive and time-consuming to cut a large 
underground base out of solid rock or compacted lava, the Standard one-man 
“living module” was a room only about six feet wide, ten feet long, and eight 
feet high. 

Each room was attractively furnished and looked very much like a good 
motel suite, with convertible sofa, TV, small hi-fi set, and vision-phone. 
Moreover, by a simple trick of interior decoration, the one unbroken wall could 
be converted by the flip of a switch into a convincing terrestrial landscape. There 
was a choice of eight views. This touch of luxury was typical of the Base, 
though it was sometimes hard to explain its necessity to the folk back on Earth. 
Every man and woman in Clavius had cost a hundred thousand dollars in 
training and transport and housing; it was worth a little extra to maintain their 
peace of mind. This was not art for art's sake, but art for the sake of sanity. 

One of the attractions of life in the base - and on the Moon as a whole - 
was undoubtedly the low gravity, which produced a sense of general well-being. 
However, this had its dangers, and it was several weeks before an emigrant from 
Earth could adapt to it. On the Moon, the human body had to leam a whole new 
set of reflexes. It had, for the first time, to distinguish between mass and weight. 

A man who weighed one hundred eighty pounds on Earth might be 
delighted to discover that he weighed only thirty pounds on the Moon. As long 
as he moved in a straight line at a uniform speed, he felt a wonderful sense of 
buoyancy. But as soon as he attempted to change course, to turn corners, or to 
stop suddenly - then he would find that his full one hundred eighty pounds of 
mass, or inertia, was stili there. For that was fixed and unalterable - the same on 
Earth, Moon, Sun, or in free space. Before one could be properly adapted to 
lunar living, therefore, it was essential to learn that ali objects were now six 
times as sluggish as their mere weight would suggest. It was a lesson usually 
driven horne by numerous collisions and hard knocks, and old lunar hands kept 
their distance from newcomers until they were acclimatized. 

With its complex of workshops, offices, storerooms, computer center, 
generators, garage, kitchen, laboratories, and food-processing piant, Clavius 
Base was a miniature world in itself. And, ironically, many of the skills that had 
been used to build this underground empire had been developed during the half 
century of the Cold War. 



Any man who had ever worked in a hardened missile site would have felt 
at home in Clavius. Here on the Moon were the same arts and hardware of 
underground living, and of protection against a hostile environment; but here 
they had been turned to the purposes of peaee. 

After ten thousand years, man had at last found something as exciting as 
war. Unfortunately, not all nations had yet realized that fact. 

The mountains that had been so prominent just before landing had 
mysteriously disappeared, hidden from sight below the steeply curving lunar 
horizon. Around the spacecraft was a flat, gray plain; brilliantly lit by the 
slanting earthlight. Although the sky was, of course, completely black, only the 
brighter stars and planets could be seen, unless the eyes were shaded from the 
surface glare. 

Several very odd vehicles were rolling up to the Aries-IB spaceship - 
cranes, hoists, servicing trucks - some automatic, some operated by a driver in a 
small pressure cabin. Most of them moved on balloon tires, for this smooth, level 
plain posed no transportation difficulties; but one tanker rolled on the peculiar 
flex-wheels which had proved one of the best all-purpose ways of getting around 
on the Moon. A series of flat plates arranged in a circle, each piate independently 
mounted and sprung, the flex-wheel had many of the advantages of the 
Caterpillar track from which it had evolved. It would adapt its shape and 
diameter to the terrain over which it was moving, and, unlike a Caterpillar track, 
would continue to function even if a few sections were missing. 

A small bus with an extension tube like a stubby elephant trunk was now 
nuzzling affectionately up against the spacecraft. A few seconds later, there were 
bangings and bumpings from outside, followed by the sound of hissing air as 
connections were made and pressure was equalized. The inner door of the 
airlock opened, and the welcoming delegation entered. 

It was led by Ralph Halvorsen, the Administrator of the Southern Province 
- which meant not only the Base but also any exploring parties that operated 
from it. 


With him was his Chief Scientist, Dr. Roy Michaels, a grizzled little 
geophysicist whom Floyd knew from previous visits, and half a dozen senior 



scientists and executives. They greeted him with respectful relief; from the 
Administrator downward, it was obvious that they looked forward to a chance of 
unloading some of their worries. 

“Very pleased to have you with us, Dr. Floyd,” said Halvorsen. “Did you 
have a good trip?” 

“Excellent,” Floyd answered. “It couldn't have been better. The crew 
looked after me very well.” He exchanged the usual small talk that courtesy 
demanded while the bus rolled away from the spacecraft; by unspoken 
agreement, no one mentioned the reason for his visit. After traveling a thousand 
feet from the landing site, the bus came to a large sign which read: 


WELCOME TO CLAVIUS BASE 
U.S. Astronautical Engineering Corps 
1994 


It then dived into a cutting which took it quickly below ground level. A 
massive door opened ahead, then closed behind them. This happened again, and 
yet a third time. When the last door had closed, there was a great roaring of air, 
and they were back in atmosphere once more, in the shirt-sleeve environment of 
the Base. 

After a short walk through a tunnel packed with pipes and cables, and 
echoing hollowly with rhythmic thumpings and throbbings, they arrived in 
executive territory, and Floyd found himself back in the familiar environment of 
typewriters, office computers, girl assistants, wall charts, and ringing telephones. 
As they paused outside the door labeled ADMINISTRATOR, Halvorsen said 
diplomatically: “Dr. Floyd and I will be along to the briefing room in a couple of 
minute s.” 


The others nodded, made agreeable sounds, and drifted off down the 
corridor. But before Halvorsen could usher Floyd into his office, there was an 



interruption, The door opened, and a small figure hurled itself at the 
Administrator. 


“Daddy! You've been Topside! And you promised to take me!” 

“Now, Diana,” said Halvorsen, with exasperated tenderness, “I only said 
I'd take you if I could. But I've been very busy meeting Dr. Floyd. Shake hands 
with him - he's just come from Earth.” 

The little girl - Floyd judged that she was about eight - extended a limp 
hand. Her face was vaguely familiar, and Floyd suddenly became aware that the 
Administrator was looking at him with a quizzical smile. With a shock of 
recollection, he understood why. 

“I don't believe it!” he exclaimed. “When I was here last she was just a 

baby!” 


“She had her fourth birthday last week,” Halvorsen answered proudly. 
“Children grow fast in this low gravity. But they don't age so quickly - they'11 
live longer than we do.” 

Floyd stared in fascination at the self-assured little lady, noting the 
graceful carriage and the unusually delicate bone structure. “It's nice to meet you 
again, Diana,” he said. Then something - perhaps sheer curiosity, perhaps 
politeness - impelled him to add: “Would you like to go to Earth?” 

Her eyes widened with astonishment; then she shook her head. 

“It's a nasty place; you hurt yourself when you fall down. Besides, there 
are too many people,” 

So here, Floyd told himself, is the first generation of the Spaceborn; there 
would be more of them in the years to come. Though there was sadness in this 
thought, there was also a great hope. When Earth was tamed and tranquil, and 
perhaps a little tired, there would stili be scope for those who loved freedom, for 
the tough pioneers, the restless adventurers. But their tools would not be ax and 
gun and canoe and wagon; they would be nuclear power piant and plasma drive 
and hydroponic farm. The time was fast approaching when Earth, like all 
mothers, must say farewell to her children. 



With a mixture of threats and promises, Halvorsen managed to evict his 
determined offspring and led Floyd into the office. The Administratori suite was 
only about fifteen feet square, but it managed to contain all the fittings and status 
symbols of the typical $50,000 a year head of a department. Signed photographs 
of important politicians - including the President of the United States and the 
Secretary General of the United Nations - adorned one wall, while signed photos 
of celebrated astronauts covered most of another. 

Floyd sank into a comfortable leather chair and was given a glass of 
“sherry,” courtesy of the lunar biochemical labs. “How's it going, Ralph?” Floyd 
asked, sipping the drink with caution, then with approval. 

“Not too bad,” Halvorsen replied. “However, there is something you'd 
better know about, before you go in there.” 

"What is it?' 

“Well, I suppose you could describe it as a morale problem,” Halvorsen 

sighed. 


“Oh?” 

“It isn't serious yet, but it's getting there fast.” “The news blackout,” Floyd 
said flatly. “Right,” Halvorsen replied. “My people are getting very steamed up 
about it. After all, most of them have families back on Earth; they probably 
believe they're all dead of moon-plague.” 

“I'm sorry about that,” said Floyd, “but no one could think of a better 
cover story, and so far it's worked. By the way - I met Moisevitch at the Space 
Station, and even he bought it.” 

“Well, that should make Security happy.” 

“Not too happy - he'd heard of TMA-1; rumors are beginning to leak out. 
But we just can't issue any statement, until we know what the damn thing is and 
whether our Chinese friends are behind it.” 


“Dr. Michaels thinks he has the answer to that. Hei dying to teli you.” 



Floyd drained his glass. “And I'm dying to hear him. Let's go.” 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

11 - Anomaly 


The briefing took place in a large rectangular chamber that could hold a 
hundred people with ease. It was equipped with the latest optical and electronic 
displays and would have looked like a model conference room but for the 
numerous posters, pinups, notices, and amateur paintings which indicated that it 
was also the center of the local cultural life. Floyd was particularly struck by a 
collection of signs, obviously assembled with loving care, which carried such 
messages as PLEASE KEEP OFF THE GRASS... NO PARKING ON EVEN 
DAYS... DEFENSE DE FUMER... TO THE BEACH... CATTLE CROSSING... 
SOFT SHOULDERS and DO NOT FEED THE ANIMALS. If these were 
genuine - as they certainly appeared to be - their transportation from Earth had 
cost a small fortune. There was a touching defiance about them; on this hostile 
world, men could stili joke about the things they had been forced to leave behind 
- and which their children would never miss. 

A crowd of forty or fifty people was waiting for Floyd, and everyone rose 
politely as he entered behind the Administrator. As he nodded at several familiar 
faces, Floyd whispered to Halvorsen “I'd like to say a few words before the 
briefing.” 

Floyd sat down in the front row, while the Administrator ascended the 
rostrum and looked round his audience. 

“Ladies and gentlemen,” Halvorsen began, “I needn't teli you that this is a 
very important occasion. We are delighted to have Dr. Heywood Floyd with us. 
We all know him by reputation, and many of us are acquainted with him 
personally. He has just completed a special flight from Earth to be here, and 
before the briefing he has a few words for us. Dr. Floyd,” Floyd walked to the 
rostrum amid a sprinkling of polite applause, surveyed the audience with a smile, 
and said: “Thank you - I only want to say this. The President has asked me to 



convey his appreciation of your - outstanding work, which we hope the world 
will soon be able to recognize. I'm quite aware,” he continued carefully, “that 
some of you - perhaps most of you - are anxious that the present veil of secrecy 
be withdrawn; you would not be scientists if you thought otherwise.” He caught 
a glimpse of Dr. Michaels, whose face was creased in a slight frown which 
brought out a long scar down his right cheek - presumably the aftermath of some 
accident in space. The geologist, he was well aware, had been protesting 
vigorously against what he called this “cops and robbers nonsense.” 

“But I would remind you,” Floyd continued, "that this is a quite 
extraordinary situation. We must be absolutely sure of our own facts; if we make 
errors now, there may be no second chance - so please be patient a little longer. 
Those are also the wishes of the President. 

“That's all I have to say. Now I'm ready for your report.” 

He walked back to his seat; the Administrator said, 'Thank you very 
much, Dr. Floyd," and nodded, rather brusquely, to his Chief Scientist. On cue, 
Dr. Michaels walked up to the rostrum, and-the lights faded out. 

A photograph of the Moon flashed onto the screen. At the very center of 
the disk was a brilliant white crater ring, from which a striking pattern of rays 
fanned out. It looked exactly as if someone had hurled a bag of flour at the face 
of the Moon, and it had spattered out in all directions. 

“This is Tycho,” said Michaels, pointing to the Central crater. “On this 
vertical photograph Tycho is even more conspicuous than when seen from Earth; 
then it's rather near the edge of the Moon. But observed from this viewpoint - 
looking straight down from a thousand miles up - you'll see how it dominates an 
entire hemisphere.” 

He let Floyd absorb this unfamiliar view of a familiar object, then 
continued: “During the past year we have been conducting a magnetic survey of 
the region, from a low-level satellite. It was completed only last month, and this 
is the resuit... the map that started all the trouble.” 

Another picture flashed on the screen; it looked like a contour map, 
though it showed magnetic intensity, not heights above sea level. For the most 
part, the lines were roughly parallel and spaced well apart; but in one corner of 



the map they became suddenly packed together, to form a series of concentric 
circles - like a drawing of a knothole in a piece of wood. 

Even to an untrained eye, it was obvious that something peculiar had 
happened to the Moon's magnetic field in this region; and in large letters across 
the bottom of the map were the words: TYCHO MAGNETIC ANOMALY-ONE 
(TMA-1). Stamped on the top right was CLASSIFIED. 

"At first we thought it might be an outcrop of magnetic rock, but ali the 
geological evidence was against it. And not even a big nickel-iron meteorite 
could produce a field as intense as this; so we decided to have a look. 

"The first party discovered nothing - just the usual level terrain, buried 
beneath a very thin layer of moon-dust. They sank a drill in the exact center of 
the magnetic field to get a core sample for study. Twenty feet down, the drill 
stopped. So the survey party started to dig - not an easy job in spacesuits, as I 
can assure you. 

“What they found brought them back to Base in a hurry. We sent out a 
bigger team, with better equipment. They excavated for two weeks - with the 
resuit you know.” 

The darkened assembly room became suddenly hushed and expectant as 
the picture on the screen changed. Though everyone had seen it many times, 
there was not a person who failed to erane forward as if hoping to find new 
details. On Earth and Moon, less than a hundred people had so far been allowed 
to set eyes on this photograph. 

It showed a man in a bright red and yellow spacesuit standing at the 
bottom of an excavation and supporting a surveyor's rod marked off in tenths of 
a meter. It was obviously a night shot, and might have been taken anywhere on 
the Moon or Mars. But until now no planet had ever produced a scene like this. 

The object before which the spacesuited man was posing was a vertical 
slab of jet-black material, about ten feet high and five feet wide: it reminded 
Floyd, somewhat ominously, of a giant tombstone. Perfectly sharp-edged and 
symmetrical, it was so black it seemed to have swallowed up the light falling 
upon it; there was no surface detail at all. It was impossible to teli whether it was 
made of stone or metal or plastic - or some material altogether unknown to man. 



“TMA-1,” Dr. Michaels declared, almost reverently. "It looks brand new, 
doesn't it? I can hardly blame those who thought it was just a few years old, and 
tried to connect it with the third Chinese Expedition, back in '98. But I never 
believed that - and now we've been able to date it positively, from local 
geological evidence. 

"My colleagues and I, Dr. Floyd, will stake our reputations on this. TMA- 
1 has nothing to do with the Chinese. Indeed, it has nothing to do with the human 
race - for when it was buried, there were no humans. 

“You see, it is approximately three million years old. What you are now 
looking at is the first evidence of intelligent life beyond the Earth.” 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

12 - Journey by Earthlight 


MACRO-CRATER PRO VINCE: Extends S from near center of visible 
face of moon, E of Central Crater Province. Densely pocked with impact craters; 
many large, and including the largest on moon; in N some craters fractured from 
impact forming Mare Imbrium. Rough surfaces almost everywhere, except for 
some crater bottoms. Most surfaces in slopes, mostly 10° to 12°; some crater 
bottoms nearly level. 

LANDING AND MOVEMENT: landing generally difficult because of 
rough, sloping surfaces; less difficult in some level crater bottoms. Movement 
possible almost everywhere but route selection required; less difficult on some 
level crater bottoms. 

CONSTRUCTION: Generally moderately difficult because of slope, and 
numerous large blocks in loose material; excavation of lava difficult in some 
crater bottoms. 

TYCHO: Post-Maria crater, 54 miles diameter, rim 7,900 feet above 
surroundings; bottom 12,000 feet deep; has the most prominent ray system on 
the moon, some rays extending more than 500 miles. 

(Extract from “Engineer Special Study of the Surface of the Moon,” 
Office, Chief of Engineers, Department of the Army. U.S. Geological Survey, 
Washington, 1961.) 


The mobile lab now rolling across the crater plain at fifty miles an hour 
looked rather like an outsized trailer mounted on eight flex-wheels. But it was 
very much more than this; it was a self-contained base in which twenty men 



could live and work for several weeks. Indeed, it was virtually a landgoing 
spaceship - and in an emergency it could even fly. If it came to a ere vas se or 
canyon which was too large to detour, and too steep to enter, it could hop across 
the obstacle on its four underjets. 

As he peered out of the window, Floyd could see stretehing ahead of him a 
well-defined trail, where dozens of vehicles had left a hard-packed band in the 
friable surface of the Moon. At regular intervals along the track were tali, 
slender rods, each carrying a flashing light. No one could possibly get lost on the 
200-mile journey from Clavius Base to TMA-1, even though it was stili night 
and the sun would not rise for several hours. 

The stars overhead were only a little brighter, or more numerous, than on a 
ciear night from the high plateaus of New Mexico or Colorado. But there were 
two things in that coal-black sky that destroyed any illusion of Earth. 

The first was Earth itself - a blazing beacon hanging above the northern 
horizon. The light pouring down from that giant half-globe was dozens of times 
more brilliant than the full moon, and it covered ali this land with a cold, blue- 
green phosphorescence. 

The second celestial apparition was a faintt, pearly cone of light slanting 
up the eastern sky. It became brighter and brighter toward the horizon, hinting of 
great fires just concealed below the edge of the Moon. 

Here was a pale glory that no man had ever seen from Earth, save during 
the few moments of a total eclipse. It was the corona, harbinger of the lunar 
dawn, giving notice that before long the sun would smite this sleeping land. 

As he sat with Halvorsen and Michaels in the forward observation lounge, 
immediately beneath the driver's position, Floyd found his thoughts turning 
again and again to the three-million-year-wide gulf that had just opened up 
before him. Like ali scientifically literate men, he was used to considering far 
longer periods of time - but they had concerned only the movements of stars and 
the slow cycles of the inanimate universe. Mind or intelligence had not been 
involved; those eons were empty of ali that touched the emotions. 

Three million years! The infinitely crowded panorama of written history, 
with its empires and its kings, its triumphs and its tragedies, covered barely one 



thousandth of this appalling span of time. Not only Man himself, but most of the 
animals now alive on Earth, did not even exist when this black enigma was so 
carefully buried here, in the most brilliant and most spectacular of all the craters 
of the Moon. 

That it had been buried, and quite deliberately, Dr. Michaels was 
absolutely sure. “At first,” he explained, "I rather hoped it might mark the site of 
some underground structure, but our latest excavations have eliminated that. It's 
sitting on a wide platform of the same 

black material, with undisturbed rock beneath it. The - creatures - who 
designed it wanted to make sure it stayed put, barring major moonquakes. They 
were building for eternity." 

There was triumph, and yet sadness, in Michaels' voice, and Floyd could 
share both emotions. At last, one of man's oldest questions had been answered; 
here was the proof, beyond all shadow of doubt, that his was not the only 
intelligence that the universe had brought forth. But with that knowledge there 
came again an aching awareness of the immensity of Time. Whatever had passed 
this way had missed mankind by a hundred thousand generations. Perhaps, 
Floyd told himself, it was just as well. And yet - what we might have learned 
from creatures who could cross space, while our ancestors were stili living in 
trees! 


A few hundred yards ahead, a signpost was coming up over the Moon's 
strangely close horizon. At its base was a tent-shaped structure covered with 
shining sil ver foil, obviously for protection against the fierce heat of day. As the 
bus rolled by, Floyd was able to read in the brilliant earthlight: 


EMERGENCY DEPOT No. 3 
20 Kilos Lox 
10 Kilos Water 


20 Foodpaks Mk 4 



1 Toolkit Type B 


1 Suit Repair Outfit 
! TELEPHONE ! 


“Have you thought of that?” asked Floyd, pointing out of the window. 
“Suppose the thing's a supply cache, left behind by an expedition that never 
returned?” 


“It's a possibility,” admitted Michaels. “That magnetic field certainly 
labeled its position, so that it could be easily found. But it's rather small - it 
couldn't hold much in the way of supplies.” 

“Why not?” interjected Halvorsen. “Who knows bow big they were? 
Perhaps they were only six inches tali, which would make the thing twenty or 
thirty stories high.” 

Michaels shook his head. “Out of the question,” he protested. “You can't 
have very small, intelligent creatures; you need a minimum brain size.” 

Michaels and Halvorsen, Floyd had noticed, usually took opposing 
viewpoints, yet there appeared to be little personal hostility or friction between 
them. They seemed to respect each other, and simply agreed to disagree. 

There was certainly little agreement anywhere about the nature of TMA-1 
- or the Tycho Monolith, as some preferred to call it, retaining part of the 
abbreviation. 

In the six hours since he had landed on the Moon, Floyd had heard a 
dozen theories, but had committed himself to none. Shrine, survey marker, tomb, 
geophysical instrument - these were perhaps the favorite suggestions, and some 
of the protagonists grew very heated in their defense. A good many bets had- 
already been placed, and a lot of money would change hands when the truth was 
finally known - if, indeed, it ever was. So far, the hard black material of the slab 
had resisted all the rather mild attempts that Michaels and his colleagues had 
made to obtain samples. They had no doubt that a laser beam would cut into it - 



for, surely, nothing could resist that frightful concentration of energy - but the 
decision to employ such violent measures would be left to Floyd. He had already 
decided that X rays, sonic probes, neutron beams, and all other nondestructive 
means of investigation would be brought into play before he called up the heavy 
artillery of the laser. It was the mark of a barbarian to destroy something one 
could not understand; but perhaps men were barbarians, beside the creatures who 
had made this thing. 

And where could they have come from? The Moon itself? No, that was 
utterly impossible. If there had ever been indigenous life on this barren world, it 
had been destroyed during the last crater-forming epoch, when most of the lunar 
surface was white-hot. 

Earth? Very unlikely, though perhaps not quite impossible. Any advanced 
terrestrial civilization - presumably a nonhuman one - back in the Pleistocene 
Era would have left many other traces of its existence. We would have known all 
about it, thought Floyd, long before we got to the Moon. 

That left two alternatives - the planets, and the stars. 

Yet all the evidence was against intelligent life elsewhere in the Solar 
System - or indeed life of any kind except on Earth and Mars. The inner planets 
were too hot, the outer ones far too cold, unless one descended into their 
atmosphere to depths where the pressures amounted to hundreds of tons to the 
square inch. 

So perhaps these visitors had come from the stars - yet that was even more 
incredible. As he looked up at the constellations strewn across the ebon lunar 
sky, Floyd remembered how often his fellow scientists had “proved” that 
interstellar travel was impossible. The journey from Earth to Moon was stili 
fairly impressive, but the very nearest star was a hundred million times more 
distant... Speculation was a waste of time; he must wait until there was more 
evidence, 

“Please fasten your seat belts and secure all loose objects,” said the cabin 
speaker suddenly. “Forty degree slope approaching.” 

Two marker posts with winking lights had appeared on the horizon, and 
the bus was steering between them. 



Floyd had barely adjusted his straps when the vehicle slowly edged itself 
over the brink of a really terrifying incline, and began to descend a long, rubble- 
covered slope as steep as the roof of a house. The slanting earth-light, coming 
from behind them, now gave very little illumination, and the bus's own 
floodlights had been switched on. Many years ago Floyd had stood on the lip of 
Vesuvius, staring into the crater; he could easily imagine that he was now driving 
down into it and the sensation was not a very pleasant one. 

They were descending one of the inner terraces of Tycho, and it leveled 
out again some thousand feet below. As they crawled down the slope, Michaels 
pointed out across the great expanse of plain now spread out beneath them. 

“There they are,” he exclaimed. Floyd nodded; he had already noticed the 
cluster of red and green lights several miles ahead, and kept his eyes fixed upon 
it as the bus edged its way delicately down the slope. The big vehicle was 
obviously under perfect control, but he did not breathe easily until it was once 
more on an even keel. 

Now he could see, glistening like silver bubbles in the earthlight, a group 
of pressure domes - the temporary shelters housing the workers on the site. Near 
these was a radio tower, a drilling rig, a group of parked vehicles, and a large 
pile of broken rock, presumably the material that had been excavated to reveal 
the monolith. This tiny camp in the wilderness looked very lonely, very 
vulnerable to the forces of nature ranged silently around it. There was no sign of 
life, and no visible hint as to why men had come here, so far from horne. 

“You can just see the crater,” said Michaels. “Over there on the right - 
about a hundred yards from that radio antenna.” 

So this is it, thought Floyd, as the bus rolled past the pressure domes, and 
came to the lip of the crater. 

His pulse quickened as he craned forward for a better view. The vehicle 
began to creep cautiously down a ramp of hard-packed rock, into the interior of 
the crater. And there, exactly as he had seen it in the photographs, was TMA-1. 

Floyd stared, blinked, shook his head, and stared again. Even in the 
brilliant earthlight, it was hard to see the object clearly; his first impression was 



of a flat rectangle that might have been cut oiit of carbon paper; it seemed to 
have no thickness at ali. Of course, this was an optical illusion; though he was 
looking at a solid body, it reflected so little light that he could see it only in 
silhouette. 

The passengers were utterly silent as the bus descended into the crater. 
There was awe, and there was also incredulity - sheer disbelief that the dead 
Moon, of all worlds, could have sprung this fantastic surprise. 

The bus came to a halt within twenty feet of the slab and broadside on so 
that all the passengers could examine it. Yet, beyond the geometrically perfect 
shape of the thing, there was little to see. Nowhere were there any marks, or any 
abatement of its ultimate, ebon blackness. It was the very crystallization of night, 
and for one moment Floyd wondered if it could indeed be some extraordinary 
natural formation, born of the fires and pressures attending the creation of the 
Moon. But that remote possibility, he knew, had already been examined and 
dismissed. 

At some signal, floodlights around the lip of the crater were switched on, 
and the bright earthlight was obliterated by a far more brilliant glare. In the lunar 
vacuum the beams were, of course, completely invisible; they formed 
overlapping ellipses of blinding white, centered on the monolith. And where 
they touched it, its ebon surface seemed to swallow them. 

Pandora's box, thought Floyd, with a sudden sense of foreboding - waiting 
to be opened by inquisitive Man. 


And what will he find inside? 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

13 - The Slow Dawn 


The main pressure dome at the TMA-1 site was only twenty feet across, 
and its interior was uncomfortably crowded. The bus, coupled to it through one 
of the two airlocks, gave some much-appreciated extra living room. 

Inside this hemispherical, double-walled balloon lived, worked, and slept 
the six scientists and technicians now permanently attached to the project. It also 
contained most of their equipment and instruments, ali the Stores that could not 
be left in the vacuum outside, cooking, washing, and toilet facilities, geological 
samples and a small TV screen through which the site could be kept under 
continuous surveillance. 

Floyd was not surprised when Halvorsen elected to remain in the dome; he 
stated his views with admirable frankness. 

“I regard spacesuits as a necessary evil,” said the Administrator, “I wear 
one four times a year, for my quarterly checkout tests. If you don't mind, IT1 sit 
here and watch over the TV.” 

Some of this prejudice was now unjustified, for the latest models were 
infinitely more comfortable than the clumsy suits of armor worn by the first 
lunar explorers. They could be put on in less than a minute, even without help, 
and were quite automatic. The Mk V into which Floyd was now carefully sealed 
would protect him from the worst that the Moon could do, either by day or by 
night. 


Accompanied by Dr. Michaels, he walked into the small airlock. As the 
throbbing of the pumps died away, and his suit stiffened almost imperceptibly 
around him, he felt himself enclosed in the silence of vacuum. 



That silence was broken by the welcome sound of his suit radio. 


“Pressure O.K., Dr. Floyd? Are you breathing normally?” 

“Yes - I'm fine.” 

His companion carefully checked the dials and gauges on the outside of 
Floyd's suit. Then he said: 

“O.K.-lefs go.” 

The outer door opened, and the dusty moonscape lay before them, 
glimmering in the earthlight. 

With a cautious, waddling movement, Floyd followed Michaels through 
the lock. It was not hard to walk; indeed, in a paradoxical way the suit made him 
feel more at horne than at any time since reaching the Moon. Its extra weight, 
and the slight resistance it imposed on his motion, gave some of the illusion of 
the lost terrestrial gravity. 

The scene had changed since the party had arrived barely an hour ago. 
Though the stars, and the half-earth, were stili as bright as ever, the fourteen-day 
lunar night had almost ended. The glow of the corona was like a false moonrise 
along the eastern sky - and then, without warning, the tip of the radio mast a 
hundred feet above Floyd's head suddenly seemed to burst into flame, as it 
caught the first rays of the hidden sun. 

They waited while the project supervisor and two of his assistants emerged 
from the airlock, then walked slowly toward the crater. By the time they had 
reached it, a thin bow of unbearable incandescence had thrust itself above the 
eastern horizon. Though it would take more than an hour for the sun to ciear the 
edge of the slowly turning moon, the stars were already banished. The crater was 
stili in shadow, but the floodlights mounted around its rim lit the interior 
brilliantly. As Floyd walked slowly down the ramp toward the black rectangle, 
he felt a sense not only of awe but of helplessness. Here, at the very portals of 
Earth, man was already face to face with a mystery that might never be solved. 
Three million years ago, something had passed this way, had left this unknown 
and perhaps unknowable Symbol of its-purpose, and had returned to the planets - 
or to the stars. 



FloycTs suit radio interrupted his reverie. "Project supervisor speaking. If 
you'd all line up on this side, we'd like to take a few photos. Dr. Floyd, will you 
stand in the middle - Dr. Michaels - thank you. No one except Floyd seemed to 
think that there was anything funny about this. In all honesty, he had to admit 
that he was glad someone had brought a camera; here was a photo that would 
undoubtedly be historic, and he wanted copies for himself. He hoped that his 
face would be clearly visible through the helmet of the suit. 

“Thanks, gentlemen,” said the photographer, after they had posed 
somewhat self-consciously in front of the monolith, and he had made a dozen 
exposures. 

“We'll ask the Base Photo Section to send you copies.” Then Floyd turned 
his full attention to the ebon slab - walking slowly around it, examining it from 
every angle, trying to imprint its strangeness upon his mind. 

He did not expect to find anything, for he knew that every square inch had 
already been gone over with microscopic care. 

Now the sluggish sun had lifted itself above the edge of the crater, and its 
rays were pouring almost broadside upon the eastern face of the block. Yet it 
seemed to absorb every particle of light as if it had never been. 

Floyd decided to try a simple experiment; he stood between the monolith 
and the sun, and looked for his own shadow on the smooth black sheet. There 
was no trace of it. At least ten kilowatts of raw heat must be falling on the slab; 
if there was anything inside, it must be rapidly cooking. 

How strange, Floyd thought, to stand here while - this thing - is seeing 
daylight for the first time since the Ice Ages began on Earth. He wondered again 
about its black color; that was ideal, of course, for absorbing solar energy. But he 
dismissed the thought at once; for who would be crazy enough to bury a 
sunpowered device twenty feet underground? 

He looked up at the Earth, beginning to wane in the morning sky. Only a 
handful of the six billion people there knew of this discovery; how would the 
world react to the news when it was finally released? The political and social 
implications were immense; every person of real intelligence - everyone who 



looked an inch beyond his nose - would find his life, his values, his philosophy, 
subtly changed. Even if nothing whatsoever was discovered about TMA-1, and it 
remained an eternal mystery, Man would know that he was not unique in the 
universe. Though he had missed them by millions of years, those who had once 
stood here might yet return: and if not, there might well be others. Ali futures 
must now contain this possibility. 

Floyd was stili musing over these thoughts when his helmet speaker 
suddenly emitted a piercing electronic shriek, like a hideously overloaded and 
distorted time signal. Involuntarily, he tried to block his ears with his spacesuited 
hands; then he recovered and groped frantically for the gain control of his 
receiver. While he was stili fumbling four more of the shrieks blasted out of the 
ether; then there was a merciful silence. 

All around the crater, figures were standing in attitudes of paralyzed 
astonishment. So it's nothing wrong with my gear, Floyd told himself; everyone 
heard those piercing electronic screams. 

After three million years of darkness, TMA-1 had greeted the lunar dawn. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

14 - The Listeners 


A hundred million miles beyond Mars, in the cold loneliness where no 
man had yet traveled, Deep Space Monitor 79 drifted slowly among the tangled 
orbits of the asteroids. For three years it had fulfilled its mission flawlessly - a 
tribute to the American scientists who had designed it, the British engineers who 
had built it, the Russian technicians who had launched it. A delicate spider's-web 
of antennas sampled the passing waves of radio noise - the ceaseless crackle and 
hiss of what Pascal, in a far simpler age, had naively called the “silence of 
infinite space.” Radiation detectors noted and analyzed incoming cosmic rays 
from the galaxy and points beyond; neutron and X-ray telescopes kept watch on 
strange stars that no human eye would ever see; magnetometers observed the 
gusts and hurricanes of the solar winds, as the Sun breathed million-mile-an- 
hour blasts of tenuous plasma into the faces of its circling children. All these 
things, and many others, were patiently noted by Deep Space Monitor 79, and 
recorded in its crystalline memory. 

One of its antennas, by now unconsidered miracles of electronics, was 
always aimed at a point never far from the Sun. Every few months its distant 
target could have been seen, had there been any eye here to watch, as a bright 
star with a close, fainter companion; but most of the time it was lost in the solar 
glaze. 


To that far-off planet Earth, every twenty-four hours, the monitor would 
send the information it had patiently garnered, packed neatly into one five- 
minute pulse. About a quarter of an hour late, traveling at the speed of light, that 
pulse would reach its destination. The machines whose duty it was would be 
waiting for it; they would amplify and record the signal, and add it to the 
thousands of miles of magnetic tape now stored in the vaults of the World Space 
Centers at Washington, Moscow, and Canberra. 



Since the first satellites had orbited, almost fifty years earlier, trillions and 
quadrillions of pulses of Information had been pouring down from space, to be 
stored against the day when they might contribute to the advance of knowledge. 
Only a minute fraction of all this raw material would ever be processed; but 
there was no way of telling what observation some scientist might wish to 
consuit, ten, or fifty, or a hundred years from now. So everything had to be kept 
on file, stacked in endless air-conditioned galleries, triplicated at the three 
centers against the possibility of accidental loss. It was part of the real treasure 
of mankind, more valuable than all the gold locked uselessly away in bank 
vaults. 


And now Deep Space Monitor 19 had noted something strange - a faint 
yet unmistakable disturbance rippling across the Solar System, and quite unlike 
any natural phenomenon it had ever observed in the past. Automatically, it 
recorded the direction, the time, the intensity; in a few hours it would pass the 
Information to Earth. 

As, also, would Orbiter M 15, circling Mars twice a day; and High 
Inclination Probe 21, climbing slowly above the plane of the ecliptic; and even 
Artificial Comet 5, heading out into the cold wastes beyond Pluto, along an orbit 
whose far point it would not reach for a thousand years. All noted the peculiar 
burst of energy that had disturbed their instruments; all, in due course, reported 
back automatically to the memory Stores on distant Earth. 

The computers might never have perceived the connection between four 
peculiar sets of signals from space-probes on independent orbits millions of 
miles apart. But as soon as he glanced at his morning report, the Radiation 
Forecaster at Goddard knew that something strange had passed through the Solar 
System during the last twenty-four hours. 

He had only part of its track, but when the computer projected it on the 
Planet Situation Board, it was as ciear and unmistakable as a vapor trail across a 
cloudless sky, or a single line of footprints over a field of virgin snow. 

Some immaterial pattern of energy, throwing off a spray of radiation like 
the wake of a racing speedboat, had leaped from the face of the Moon, and was 
heading out toward the stars. 



III - BETWEEN PLANETS 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

15 - Discovery 


The ship was stili only thirty days from Earth, yet David Bowman 
sometimes found it hard to believe that be had ever known any other existence 
than the closed little world of Discovery. All his years of training, all his earlier 
missions to the Moon and Mars, seemed to belong to another man, in another 
life. 


Frank Poole admitted to the same feelings, and had sometimes jokingly 
regretted that the nearest psychiatrist was the better part of a hundred million 
miles away. But this sense of isolation and estrangement was easy enough to 
understand, and certainly indicated no abnormality. In the fifty years since men 
had ventured into space, there had never been a mission quite like this. 

It had begun, five years ago, as Project Jupiter - the first manned round 
trip to the greatest of the planets. The ship was nearly ready for the two-year 
voyage when, somewhat abruptly, the mission profile had been changed. 

Discovery would stili go to Jupiter; but she would not stop there. She 
would not even slacken speed as she raced through the far-ranging Jovian 
satellite system. On the contrary - she would use the gravitational field of the 
giant world us a sling to cast her even farther from the Sun. Like a comet, she 
would streak on across the outer reaches of the solar system to her ultimate goal, 
the ringed glory of Saturn. And she would never return. 

For Discovery, it would be a one-way trip - yet her crew had no intention 
of committing suicide. If all went well, they would be back on Earth within 
seven years - five of which would pass like a flash in the dreamless sleep of 
hibernation, while they awaited rescue by the stili unbuilt Discovery II. 

The word “rescue” was carefully avoided in all the Astronautics Agency's 



statements and documents; it implied some failure of planning, and the approved 
jargon was “re-acquisition.” If anything went really wrong, there would certainly 
be no hope of rescue, almost a billion miles from Earth. 

It was a calculated risk, like ali voyages into the unknown. But half a 
century of research had proved that artificially induced human hibernation was 
perfectly safe, and it had opened up new possibilities in space travel. Not until 
this mission, however, had they been exploited to the utmost. 

The three members of the survey team, who would not be needed until the 
ship entered her final orbit around Saturn, would sleep through the entire 
outward flight. Tons of food and other expendables would thus be saved; almost 
as important, the team would be fresh and alert, and not fatigued by the ten- 
month voyage, when they went into action. 

Discovery would enter a parking orbit around Saturn, becoming a new 
moon of the giant planet. She would swing back and forth along a two-million- 
mile ellipse that took her close to Saturn, and then across the orbits of all its 
major moons. They would have a hundred days in which to map and study a 
world with eighty times the area of Earth, and surrounded by a retinue of at least 
fifteen known satellites - one of them as large as the planet Mercury. 

There must be wonders enough here for centuries of study; the first 
expedition could only carry out a preliminary reconnaissance. All that it found 
would be radioed back to Earth; even if the explorers never returned, their 
discoveries would not be lost. 

At the end of the hundred days, Discovery would close down. All the crew 
would go into hibernation; only the essential systems would continue to operate, 
watched over by the ship's tireless electronic brain. She would continue to swing 
around Saturn, on an orbit now so well determined that men would know exactly 
where to look for her a thousand years hence. But in only five years, according 
to present pians, Discovery II would come. Even if six or seven or eight years 
elapsed, her sleeping passengers would never know the difference. For all of 
them, the clock would have stopped as it had stopped already for Whitehead, 
Kaminski, and Hunter. 

Sometimes Bowman, as First Captain of Discovery, envied his three 
unconscious colleagues in the frozen peace of the Hibernaculum. They were free 



from all boredom and all responsibility; until they reached Saturn, the external 
world did not exist. 

But that world was watching them, through their bio-sensor displays. 
Tucked inconspicuously away among the massed instrumentation of the Control 
Deck were five small panels marked Hunter, Whitehead, Kaminski, Poole, 
Bowman. The last two were blank and lifeless; their time would not come until a 
year from now. The others bore constellations of tiny green lights, announcing 
that everything was well; and on each was a small display screen across which 
sets of glowing lines traced the leisurely rhythms that indicated pulse, 
respiration, and brain activity. 

There were times when Bowman, well aware how unnecessary this was - 
for the alarm would sound instantly if anything was wrong - would switch over 
to audio output. He would listen, half hypnotized, to the infinitely slow 
heartbeats of his sleeping colleagues, keeping his eyes fixed on the sluggish 
waves that marched in synchronism across the screen. 

Most fascinating of all were the EEG displays - the electronic signatures 
of three personalities that had once existed, and would one day exist again. They 
were almost free from the spikes and valleys, the electrical explosions that 
marked the activity of the waking brain - or even of the brain in normal sleep. If 
there was any wisp of consciousness remaining, it was beyond the reach of 
Instruments, and of memory. 

This last fact Bowman knew from personal experience. Before he was 
chosen for this mission, his reactions to hibernation had been tested. He was not 
sure whether he had lost a week of his life - or whether he had postponed his 
eventual death by the same amount of time. 

When the electrodes had been attached to his forehead, and the sleep- 
generator had started to pulse, he had seen a brief display of kaleidoscopic 
patterns and drifting stars. Then they had faded, and darkness had engulfed him. 
He had never felt the injections, stili less the first touch of cold as his body 
temperature was reduced to only a few degrees above freezing. 


He awoke, and it seemed that he had scarcely closed his eyes. But he knew 



that was an illusion; somehow, he was convinced that years had really passed. 

Had the mission been completed? Had they already reached Saturn, 
carried out their survey, and gone into hibernation? Was Discovery II here, to 
take them back to Earth? 

He lay in a dreamlike haze, utterly unable to distinguish between real and 
false memories. He opened his eyes, but there was little to see except a blurred 
constellation of lights which puzzled him for some minutes. 

Then he realized that he was looking at the indicator lamps on a Ship 
Situation Board, but it was impossible to focus on them. He soon gave up the 
attempt. 

Warm air was blowing across him, removing the chill from his limbs. 
There was quiet, but stimulating, music welling from a speaker behind his head. 
It was slowly growing louder and louder. 

Then a relaxed, friendly - but he knew computer generated - voice spoke 
to him. 


“You are becoming operational, Dave. Do not get up or attempt any 
violent movements. Do not try to speak.” 

Do not get up! thought Bowman. That was funny. He doubted if he could 
wriggle a finger. Rather to his surprise, he found that he could. 

He felt quite contented, in a dazed, stupid kind of way. He knew dimly that 
the rescue ship must have come, that the automatic revival sequence had been 
triggered, and that soon he would be seeing other human beings. That was fine, 
but he did not get excited about it. 

Presently he felt hunger. The computer, of course, had anticipated this 

need. 


"There is a signal button by your right hand, Dave. 


If you are hungry, please press it." 



Bowman forced his fingers to hunt around, and presently discovered the 
pear-shaped bulb. He had forgotten all about it, though he must have known it 
was there. How much else had he forgotten: Did hibernation erase memory? 

He pressed the button, and waited. Several minutes later, a metal arm 
moved out from the bunk, and a plastic nipple descended toward his lips. He 
sucked on it eagerly, and a warm, sweet fluid coursed down his throat, brining 
renewed strength with every drop. 

Presently it went away, and he rested once more. He could move his arms 
and legs now; the thought of walking was no longer an impossible dream. 

Though he felt his strength swiftly returning, he would have been content 
to lie here forever, if there had been no further stimulus from outside. But 
presently another voice spoke to him - and this time it was wholly human, not a 
construet of electrical pulses assembled by a more-than-human memory. It was 
also a familiar voice, though it was some time before he could recognize it 

“Helio, Dave. You're coming round fine. You can talk now. Do you know 
where you are?” 

He worried about this for some time. If he was really orbiting Saturn, what 
had happened during all the months since he had left Earth? Again he began to 
wonder if he was suffering from amnesia, Paradoxically, that very thought 
reassured him, if he could remember the word “amnesia” his brain must be in 
fairly good shape. 

But he stili did not know where he was, and the speaker at the other end of 
the Circuit must have understood his situation completely. 

“Don't worry, Dave. This is Frank Poole. I'm watching your heart and 
respiration-everything is perfectly normal. Just relax - take it easy. We're going 
to open the door now and pull you out.” 

Soft light flooded into the chamber; he saw moving shapes silhouetted 
against the widening entrance. And in that moment, all his memories came back 
to him, and be knew exactly where he was. 


Though he had come back safely from the furthest borders of sleep, and 



the nearest borders of death, he had been gone only a week. When he left the 
Hibernaculum, he would not see the cold Saturnian sky; that was more than a 
year in the future and a billion miles away. 

He was stili in the trainer at the Houston Space Flight Center under the hot 
Texas sun. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

16 - Hal 


But now Texas was invisible, and even the United States was hard to see. 
Though the low-thrust plasma drive had long since been closed down, Discovery 
was stili coasting with her slender arrowlike body pointed away from Earth, and 
ali her high-powered optical gear was oriented toward the outer planets, where 
her destiny lay. 

There was one telescope, however, that was permanently aimed at Earth. It 
was mounted like a gunsight on the rim of the ship's long-range antenna, and 
checked that the great parabolic bowl was rigidly locked upon its distant target. 
While Earth remained centered in the crosswires, the vital communication link 
was intact, and messages could come and go along the invisible beam that 
lengthened more than two million miles with every day that passed. 

At least once in every watch period Bowman would lock homeward 
through the antenna-alignment telescope. As Earth was now far back toward the 
sun, its darkened hemisphere faced Discovery, and on the Central display screen 
the planet appeared as a dazzling silver crescent, like another Venus. 

It was rare that any geographical features could be identified in that ever- 
shrinking arc of light, for cloud and haze concealed them, but even the darkened 
portion of the disk was endlessly fascinating. It was sprinkled with shining 
cities; sometimes they burned with a steady light, sometimes they twinkled like 
fireflies as atmospheric tremors passed over them. 

There were also periods when, as the Moon swung back and forth in its 
orbit, it shone down like a great lamp upon the darkened seas and continents of 
Earth. 


Then, with a thrill of recognition, Bowman could often glimpse familiar 



coastlines, shining in that spectral lunar light. And sometimes, when the Pacific 
was calm, he could even see the moonglow shimmering across its face; and he 
would remember nights beneath the palm trees of tropical lagoons. 

Yet he had no regrets for these lost beauties. He had enjoyed them all, in 
his thirty-five years of life; and he was determined to enjoy them again, when he 
returned rich and famous. Meanwhile, distance made them all the more precious. 

The sixth member of the crew cared for none of these things, for it was not 
human. It was the highly advanced HAL 9000 computer, the brain and nervous 
system of the ship. 

Hal (for Heuristically programmed ALgorithmic computer, no less) was a 
masterwork of the third computer breakthrough. These seemed to occur at 
intervals of twenty years, and the thought that another one was now imminent 
already worried a great many people. 

The first had been in the 1940s, when the long-obsolete vacuum tube had 
made possible such clumsy, high-speed morons as ENIAC and its successors. 
Then, in the 1960s, solid-state microelectronics had been perfected. With its 
advent, it was ciear that artificial intelligences at least as powerful as Man's need 
be no larger than office desks - if one only knew how to construet them. 

Probably no one would ever know this; it did not matter. In the 1980s, 
Minsky and Good had shown how neural networks could be generated 
automatically - self replicated - in accordance with any arbitrary learning 
program. Artificial brains could be grown by a process strikingly analogous to 
the development of a human brain. In any given case, the precise details would 
never be known, and even if they were, they would be millions of times too 
complex for human understanding. Whatever way it worked, the final resuit was 
a machine intelligence that could reproduce - some philosophers stili preferred to 
use the word “mimic” - most of the activities of the human brain - and with far 
greater speed and reliability. It was extremely expensive, and only a few units of 
the HAL9000 series had yet been built; but the old jest that it would always be 
easier to make organic brains by unskilled labor was beginning to sound a little 
hollow. 


Hal had been trained for this mission as thoroughly as his human 
colleagues - and at many times their rate of input, for in addition to his intrinsic 



speed, he never slept. His prime task was to monitor the life-support systems, 
continually checking oxygen pressure, temperature, hull leakage, radiation, and 
all the other interlocking factors upon which the lives of the fragile human cargo 
depended. He could carry out the intricate navigational corrections, and execute 
the necessary flight maneuvers when it was time to change course. And he could 
watch over the hibernators, making any necessary adjustments to their 
environment and doling out the minute quantities of intravenous fluids that kept 
them alive. 

The first generations of computers had received their inputs through 
glorified typewriter keyboards, and had replied through high-speed printers and 
visual displays. Hal could do this when necessary, but most of his 
communication with his shipmates was by means of the spoken word. Poole and 
Bowman could talk to Hal as if he were a human being and he would reply in the 
perfect idiomatic English he had learned during the fleeting weeks of his 
electronic childhood. 

Whether Hal could actually think was a question which had been settled 
by the British mathematician Alan Turing back in the 1940s. Turing had pointed 
out that, if one could carry out a prolonged conversation with a machine - 
whether by typewriter or microphone was immaterial - without being able to 
distinguish between its replies and those that a man might give, then the machine 
was thinking, by any sensible definition of the word. Hal could pass the Turing 
test with ease. 

The time might even come when Hal would take command of the ship. In 
an emergency, if no one answered his signals, he would attempt to wake the 
sleeping members of the crew, by electrical and Chemical stimulation. If they did 
not respond, he would radio Earth for further orders. 

And then, if there was no reply from Earth, he would take what measures 
he deemed necessary to safeguard the ship and to continue the mission - whose 
real purpose he alone knew, and which his human colleagues could never have 
guessed. 


Poole and Bowman had often humorously referred to themselves as 
caretakers or janitors aboard a ship that could really run itself. They would have 
been astonished, and more than a little indignant, to discover how much truth 
that jest contained. 




2001-A Space Odyssey 


17 - Cruise Mode 


The day-by-day running of the ship had been planned with great care, and 
- theoretically at least - Bowman and Poole knew what they would be doing at 
every moment of the twenty-four hours. They operated on a twelve-hours-on, 
twelve-hours-off basis, taking charge alternately, and never being both asleep at 
the same time. The officer on duty remained on the Control Deck, while his 
deputy saw to the general housekeeping, inspected the ship, coped with the odd 
jobs that constantly arose, or relaxed in his cubicle. 

Although Bowman was nominal Captain on this phase of the mission, no 
outside observer could have deduced the fact. He and Poole switched roles, rank, 
and responsibilities completely every twelve hours. This kept them both at peak 
training, minimized the chances of friction, and helped toward the goal of 100 
percent redundancy. 

Bowman's day began at 0600, ship's time - the Universal Ephemeris Time 
of the astronomers. If he was late, Hal had a variety of beeps and chimes to 
remind him of his duty, but they had never been used. As a test, Poole had once 
switched off the alarm; Bowman had stili risen automatically at the right time. 

His first official act of the day would be to advance the Master 
Hibernation Timer twelve hours. If this operation was missed twice in a row, Hal 
would assume that both he and Poole had been incapacitated, and would take the 
necessary emergency action. 

Bowman would attend to his toilet, and do his isometric exercises, before 
settling down to breakfast and the morning's radio-fax edition of the World 
Times. On Earth, he never read the paper as carefully as he did now; even the 
smallest items of society gossip, the most fleeting political rumors, seemed of 
absorbing interest as it flashed across the screen. 



At 0700 he would officially relieve Poole on the Control Deck, bringing 
him a squeeze-tube of coffee from the kitchen. If - as was usually the case - there 
was nothing to report and no action to be taken, he would settle down to check 
all the instrument readings, and would run through a series of tests designed to 
spot possible malfunctions. By 1000 this would be finished, and he would start 
on a study period. 

Bowman had been a student for more than half his life; he would continue 
to be one until he retired. Thanks to the twentieth-century revolution in training 
and information-handling techniques, he already possessed the equivalent of two 
or three college educations - and, what was more, he could remember 90 percent 
of what he had learned. 

Fifty years ago, he would have been considered a specialist in applied 
astronomy, cybernetics, and space propulsion systems - yet he was prone to 
deny, with genuine indignation, that he was a specialist at all. Bowman had 
never found it possible to focus his interest exclusively on any subject; despite 
the dark warnings of his instructors, he had insisted on taking his Master's degree 
in General Astronautics - a course with a vague and woolly syllabus, designed 
for those whose IQs were in the low 130s and who would never reach the top 
ranks of their profession. 

His decision had been right; that very refusal to specialize had made him 
uniquely qualified for his present task. In much the same way Frank Poole - who 
sometimes disparagingly called himself “General Practitioner in space biology” - 
had been an ideal choice as his deputy. The two of them, with, if necessary, help 
from Hal's vast Stores of information, could cope with any problems likely to 
arise during the voyage - as long as they kept their minds alert and receptive, and 
continually reengraved old patterns of memory. 

So for two hours, from 1000 to 1200, Bowman would engage in a 
dialogue with an electronic tutor, checking his general knowledge or absorbing 
material specific to this mission. He would prowl endlessly over ship's pians, 
Circuit diagrams, and voyage profiles, or would try to assimilate all that was 
known about Jupiter, Saturn, and their far-ranging families of moons. 

At midday, he would retire to the galley and leave the ship to Hal while he 
prepared his lunch. Even here, he was stili fully in touch with events, for the tiny 



lounge-cum-dining room contained a duplicate of the Situation Display Panel, 
and Hal could call him at a momenfs notice. Poole would join him for this meal, 
before retiring for his six-hour sleep period, and usually they would watch one of 
the regular TV programs beamed to them from Earth. 

Their menus had been planned with as much care as any part of the 
mission, The food, most of it freeze-dried, was uniformly excellent, and had 
been chosen for the minimum of trouble; Packets had merely to be opened and 
popped into the tiny auto-galley, which beeped for attention when the job was 
done. They could enjoy what tasted like - and, equally important, looked like - 
orange juice, eggs (any style), steaks, chops, roasts, fresh vegetables, assorted 
fruits, ice cream, and even freshly baked bread. 

After lunch, from 1300 to 1600 Bowman would make a slow and careful 
tour of the ship - or such part of it as was accessible. Discovery measured almost 
four hundred feet from end to end, but the little universe occupied by her crew 
lay entirely inside the forty-foot sphere of the pressure hull. 

Here were all the life-support systems, and the Control Deck which was 
the operational heart of the ship. Below this was a small “space-garage” fitted 
with three airlocks, through which powered capsules, just large enough to hold a 
man, could sail out into the void if the need arose for extravehicular activity. 

The equatorial region of the pressure sphere - the slice, as it were, from 
Capricorn to Cancer - enclosed a slowly rotating drum, thirty-five feet in 
diameter. As it made one revolution every ten seconds, this carrousel or 
centrifuge produced an artificial gravity equal to that of the Moon. This was 
enough to prevent the physical atrophy which would resuit from the complete 
absence of weight, and it also allowed the routine functions of living to be 
carried out under normal - or nearly normal - conditions. 

The carrousel therefore contained the kitchen, dining, washing, and toilet 
facilities. Only here was it safe to prepare and handle hot drinks - quite 
dangerous in weightless conditions, where one can be badly scalded by floating 
globules of boiling water. The problem of shaving was also solved; there would 
be no weightless bristles drifting around to endanger electrical equipment and 
produce a health hazard. 


Around the rim of the carrousel were five tiny cubicles, fitted out by each 



astronaut according to taste and containing his personal belongings. Only 
Bowman's and Poole's were now in use, while the future occupants of the other 
three cabins reposed in their electronic sarcophagi next door. 

The spin of the carrousel could be stopped if necessary; when this 
happened, its angular momentum had to be stored in a flywheel, and switched 
back again when rotation was restarted. But normally it was left running at 
constant speed, for it was easy enough to enter the big, slowly turning drum by 
going hand-over-hand along a pole through the zero-gee region at its center. 
Transferring to the moving section was as easy and automatic, after a little 
experience, as stepping onto a moving escalator. 

The spherical pressure hull formed the head of a flimsy, arrow-shaped 
structure more than a hundred yards long. Discovery, like all vehicles intended 
for deep space penetration, was too fragile and unstreamlined ever to enter an 
atmosphere, or to defy the full gravitational field of any planet. She had been 
assembled in orbit around the Earth, tested on a translunar maiden flight, and 
finally checked out in orbit above the Moon. 

She was a creature of pure space - and she looked it. Immediately behind 
the pressure hull was grouped a cluster of four large liquid hydrogen tanks - and 
beyond them, forming a long, slender V, were the radiating fins that dissipated 
the waste heat of the nuclear reactor. Veined with a delicate tracery of pipes for 
the cooling fluid, they looked like the wings of some vast dragonfly, and from 
certain angles gave Discovery a fleeting resemblance to an old-time sailing ship, 

At the very end of the V, three hundred feet from the crew-compartment, 
was the shielded inferno of the reactor, and the complex of focusing electrodes 
through which emerged the incandescent star-stuff of the plasma drive. This had 
done its work weeks ago, forcing Discovery out of her parking orbit round the 
Moon. Now the reactor was merely ticking over as it generated electrical power 
for the ship's Services, and the great radiating fins, that would glow cherry red 
when Discovery was accelerating under maximum thrust, were dark and cool. 

Although it would require an excursion out into space to examine this 
region of the ship, there were instruments and remote TV cameras which gave a 
full report on conditions here. Bowman now felt that he knew intimately every 
square foot of radiator, panels, and every piece of plumbing associated with 
them. 



By 1600, he would have finished his inspection, and would make a 
detailed verbal report to Mission Control, talking until the acknowledgment 
started to come in. Then he would switch off his own transmitter, listen to what 
Earth had to say, and send back his reply to any queries. At 1800 hours, Poole 
would awaken, and he would hand over command. 

He would then have six off-duty hours, to use as he pleased. Sometimes he 
would continue his studies, or listen to music, or look at movies. Much of the 
time he would wander at will through the ship's inexhaustible electronic library. 
He had become fascinated by the great explorations of the past - understandably 
enough, in the circumstances. Sometimes he would cruise with Pytheas out 
through the Pillars of Hercules, along the coast of a Europe barely emerging 
from the Stone Age, and venture almost to the chill mists of the Arctic. Or, two 
thousand years later, he would pursue the Manila galleons with Anson, sail with 
Cook along the unknown hazards of the Great Barrier Reef, achieve with 
Magellan the first circumnavigation of the world. And he began to read the 
Odyssey, which of all books spoke to him most vividly across the gulfs of time. 

For relaxation he could always engage Hal in a large number of semi- 
mathematical games, including checkers, chess, and polyominoes. If Hal went 
all out, he could win anyone of them; but that would be bad for morale. So he 
had been programmed to win only fifty percent of the time, and his human 
partners pretended not to know this. 

The last hours of Bowman's day were devoted to general cleaning up and 
odd jobs, followed by dinner at 2000 - again with Poole. Then there would be an 
hour during which he would make or receive any personal call from Earth. 

Like all his colleagues, Bowman was unmarried; it was not fair to send 
family men on a mission of such duration, though numerous ladies had promised 
to wait until the expedition returned, no one had really believed this. At first, 
both Poole and Bowman had been making rather intimate personal calls once a 
week, though the knowledge that many ears must be listening at the Earth end of 
the Circuit tended to inhibit them. Yet already, though the voyage was scarcely 
started, the warmth and frequency of the conversations with their girls on Earth 
had begun to diminish. They had expected this; it was one of the penalties of an 
astronaufs way of life, as it had once been of a mariner's. 



It was true - indeed, notorious - that seamen had compensations at other 
ports; unfortunately there were no tropical islands full of dusky maids beyond 
the orbit of Earth. The space medies, of course, had tackled this problem with 
their usual enthusiasm; the ship's pharmacopoeia provided adequate, though 
hardly glamorous, substitutes. 

Just before he signed off Bowman would make his final report, and check 
that Hal had transmitted all the instrumentation tapes for the day's run. Then, if 
he felt like it, he would spend a couple of hours either reading or looking at a 
movie; and at midnight he would go to sleep - usually without any help from 
electronarcosis. Poole's program was a mirror image of his own, and the two 
schedules dovetailed together without friction. 

Both men were fully occupied, they were too intelligent and well-adjusted 
to quarrel, and the voyage had settled down to a comfortable, utterly uneventful 
routine, the passage of time marked only by the changing numbers on the digital 
clocks. 


The greatest hope of Discovery's little crew was that nothing would mar 
this peaceful monotony in the weeks and months that lay ahead. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

18 - Through the Asteroids 


Week after week, running like a streetcar along the tracks of her utterly 
predetermined orbit, Discovery swept past the orbit of Mars and on toward 
Jupiter. Unlike all the vessels traversing the skies or seas of Earth, she required 
not even the most minute touch on the Controls. Her course was fixed by the 
laws of gravitation; there were no uncharted shoals, no dangerous reefs on which 
she would run aground. Nor was there the slightest danger of collision with 
another ship; for there was no vessel - at least of Man's making - anywhere 
between her and the infinitely distant stars. 

Yet the space which she was now entering was far from empty. Ahead lay 
a no-man's land threaded by the paths of more than a million asteroids - less than 
ten thousand of which had ever had their orbits precisely determined by 
astronomers. Only four were over a hundred miles in diameter; the vast majority 
were merely giant boulders, trundling aimlessly through space. 

There was nothing that could be done about them; though even the 
smallest could completely destroy the ship if it slammed into it at tens of 
thousands of miles an hour, the chance of this happening was negligible. 

On the average, there was only one asteroid in a volume a million miles on 
a side; that Discovery should also happen to occupy this same point, and at the 
same time, was the very least of her crew's worries. 

On Day 86 they were due to make their closest approach to any known 
asteroid, It had no name - merely the number 7794 - and was a fifty-yard- 
diameter rock that had been detected by the Lunar Observatory in 1997 and 
immediately forgotten except by the patient computers of the Minor Planet 
Bureau. 



When Bowman came on duty, Hal promptly reminded hint of the 
forthcoming encounter - not that he was likely to have forgotten the only 
scheduled in-flight event of the entire voyage, The track of the asteroid against 
the stars, and its coordinates at the moment of closest approach, had already 
been printed out on the display screens. Listed also were the observations to be 
made or attempted; they were going to be very busy when 7794 flashed past 
them only nine hundred miles away, at a relative speed of eighty thousand miles 
an hour. 

When Bowman asked Hal for the telescopic display, a sparsely sprinkled 
star field flashed onto the screen. There was nothing that looked like an asteroid; 
all the images, even under the highest magnification, were dimensionless points 
of light. 


“Give me the target reticule,” asked Bowman. Immediately four faint, 
narrow lines appeared, bracketing a tiny and undistinguished star. He stared at it 
for many minutes, wondering if Hal could possibly be mistaken; then he saw that 
the pinpoint of light was moving, with barely perceptible slowness, against the 
background of the stars. It might stili be half a million miles away - but its 
movement proved that, as cosmic distances went, it was almost near enough to 
touch. 


When Poole joined him on the control deck six hours later, 7794 was 
hundreds of times more brilliant, and was moving so swiftly against its 
background that there was no question of its identity. And it was no longer a 
point of light; it had begun to show a clearly visible disk. 

They stared at that passing pebble in the sky with the emotions of sailors 
on a long sea voyage, skirting a coast on which they cannot land. Though they 
were perfectly well aware that 7794 was only a lifeless, airless chunk of rock, 
this knowledge scarcely affected their feelings. It was the only solid matter they 
would meet this side of Jupiter - stili two hundred million miles away. 

Through the high-powered telescope, they could see that the asteroid was 
very irregular, and turning slowly end over end. Sometimes it looked like a 
flattened sphere, sometimes it resembled a roughly shaped block; its rotation 
period was just over two minutes. There were mottled patches of light and shade 
distributed apparently at random over its surface, and often it sparkled like a 
distant window as planes or outcroppings of crystalline material flashed in the 



sun. 


It was racing past them at almost thirty miles a second; they had only a 
few frantic minutes in which to observe it closely. The automatic cameras took 
dozens of photographs, the navigation radar's returning echoes were carefully 
recorded for future analysis - and there was just time for a single impact probe. 

The probe carried no instruments; none could survive a collision at such 
cosmic speeds. It was merely a small slug of metal, shot out from Discovery on a 
course which should intersect that of the asteroid. 

As the seconds before impact ticked away, Poole and Bowman waited 
with mounting tension. The experiment, simple though it was in principle, taxed 
the accuracy of their equipment to the limits. They were aiming at a hundred- 
foot-diameter target, from a distance of thousands of miles. 

Against the darkened portion of the asteroid there was a sudden, dazzling 
explosion of light. The tiny slug had impacted at meteoric speed; in a fraction of 
a second all its energy had been transformed into heat. A puff of incandescent 
gas had erupted briefly into space; aboard Discovery, the cameras were 
recording the rapidly fading spectral lines. Back on Earth, experts would analyze 
them, looking for the telltale signatures of glowing atoms. And so, for the first 
time, the composition of an asteroid's crust would be determined. 

Within an hour, 7794 was a dwindling star, showing no trace of a disk. 
When Bowman next came on watch it had vanished completely. 

They were alone again; they would remain alone, until the outermost of 
Jupiter's moons came swimming up toward them, three months from now. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

19 - Transit of Jupiter 


Even front twenty million miles away, Jupiter was already the most 
conspicuous object in the sky ahead. The planet was now a pale, salmon-hued 
disk, about half the size of the Moon as seen from Earth, with the dark, parallel 
bands of its cloud belts clearly visible. 

Shuttling back and forth in the equatorial plane were the brilliant stars of 
Io, Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto - worlds that elsewhere would have counted 
as planets in their own right, but which here were merely satellites of a giant 
master. 


Through the telescope, Jupiter was a glorious sight - a mottled, 
multicolored globe that seemed to fili the sky. It was impossible to grasp its real 
size; Bowman kept reminding himself that it was eleven times the diameter of 
Earth, but for a long time this was a statistic with no real meaning. 

Then, while he was briefing himself from the tapes in Hal's memory units, 
he found something that suddenly brought the appalling scale of the planet into 
focus. It was an illustration that showed the Earth's entire surface peeled off and 
then pegged, like the skin of an animal, on the disk of Jupiter. Against this 
background, all the continents and oceans of Earth appeared no larger than India 
on the terrestrial globe. 

When Bowman used the highest magnification of Discovery's telescopes, 
he appeared to be hanging above a slightly flattened globe, looking down upon a 
vista of racing clouds that had been smeared into bands by the giant world's swift 
rotation. Sometimes those bands congealed into wisps and knots and continent- 
sized masses of colored vapor; sometimes they were linked by transient bridges 
thousands of miles in length. Hidden beneath those clouds was enough material 
to outweigh all the other planets in the Solar System. And what else, Bowman 



wondered, was also hidden there? 


Over this shifting, turbulent roof of clouds, forever hiding the real surface 
of the planet, circular patterns of darkness sometimes glided. One of the inner 
moons was transiting the distant sun, its shadow marching beneath it over the 
restless Jovian cloudscape. 

There were other, and far smaller, moons even out here - twenty million 
miles from Jupiter. But they were only flying mountains, a few dozen miles in 
diameter, and the ship would pass nowhere near any of them. Every few minutes 
the radar transmitter would gather its strength and send out a silent thunderclap 
of power; no echoes of new satellites came pulsing back from the emptiness. 

What did come, with ever growing intensity, was the roar of Jupiter's own 
radio voice. In 1955, just before the dawn of the space age, astronomers had 
been astonished to find that Jupiter was blasting out millions of horsepower on 
the ten-meter band. It was merely raw noise, associated with haloes of charged 
particles circling the planet like the Van Allen belts of Earth, but on a far greater 
scale. 


Sometimes, during lonely hours on the control deck, Bowman would listen 
to this radiation. He would turn up the gain until the room filled with a crackling, 
hissing roar; out of this background, at irregular intervals, emerged brief whistles 
and peeps like the cries of demented birds. It was an eerie sound, for it had 
nothing to do with Man; it was as lonely and as meaningless as the murmur of 
waves on a beach, or the distant crash of thunder beyond the horizon. 

Even at her present speed of over a hundred thousand miles an hour, it 
would take Discovery almost two weeks to cross the orbits of all the Jovian 
satellites. More moons circled Jupiter than planets orbited the Sun; the Lunar 
Observatory was discovering new ones every year, and the tally had now 
reached thirty-six. The outermost - Jupiter XXVII - moved backwards in an 
unstable path nineteen million miles from its temporary master. It was the prize 
in a perpetual tug-of-war between Jupiter and the Sun, for the planet was 
constantly capturing short-lived moons from the asteroid belt, and losing them 
again after a few million years. Only the inner satellites were its permanent 
property; the Sun could never wrest them from its grasp. 


Now there was new prey for the clashing gravitation at fields, Discovery 



was accelerating toward Jupiter along a complex orbit computed months ago by 
the astronomers on Earth, and constantly checked by Hal. From time to time 
there would be minute, automatic nudges from the control jets, scarcely 
perceptible aboard the ship, as they made fine adjustments to the trajectory. 

Over the radio link with Earth, Information was flowing back in a constant 
stream. They were now so far from horne that, even traveling at the speed of 
light, their signals were taking fifty minutes for the journey. Though the whole 
world was looking over their shoulder, watching through their eyes and their 
Instruments as Jupiter approached, it would be almost an hour before the news of 
their discoveries reached horne. 

The telescopic cameras were operating constantly as the ship cut across 
the orbit of the giant inner satellites - every one of them larger than the Moon, 
every one of them unknown territory. Three hours before transit, Discovery 
passed only twenty thousand miles from Europa, and ali instruments were aimed 
at the approaching world, as it grew steadily in size, changed from globe to 
crescent, and swept swiftly sunward. 

Here were fourteen million square miles of land which, until this moment, 
had never been more than a pinhead in the mightiest telescope. They would race 
past it in minutes, and must make the most of the encounter, recording all the 
information they could. There would be months in which they could play it back 
at leisure. 

From a distance, Europa had seemed like a giant snowball, reflecting the 
light of the far-off sun with remarkable efficiency. Closer observations 
confirmed this; unlike the dusty Moon, Europa was a brilliant white, and much 
of its surface was covered with glittering hunks that looked like stranded 
icebergs. Almost certainly, these were formed from ammonia and water that 
Jupiter's gravitational field had somehow failed to capture. 

Only along the equator was bare rock visible; here was an incredibly 
jagged no-man's-land of canyons and jumbled boulders, forming a darker band 
that completely surrounded the little world. There were a few impact craters, but 
no sign of vulcanism; Europa had obviously never possessed any internal 
sources of heat. There was, as had long been known, a trace of atmosphere. 
When the dark edge of the satellite passed across a star, it dimmed briefly before 
the moment of eclipse. And in somr areas there was a hint of cloud - perhaps a 



mist of ammonia droplets, borne on tenuous methane winds. 

As swifdy as it had rushed out of the sky ahead, Europa dropped astem; 
and now Jupiter itself was only two hours away. Hal had checked and rechecked 
the ship's orbit with infinite care, and there was no need for further speed 
corrections until the moment of closest approach. Yet, even knowing this, it was 
a strain on the nerves to watch that giant globe ballooning minute by minute. It 
was difficult to believe that Discovery was not plunging directly into it, and that 
the planefs immense gravitational field was not dragging them down to 
destruction. Now was the time to drop the atmospheric probes - which, it was 
hoped, would survive long enough to send back some information from below 
the Jovian cloud deck. Two stubby, bomb-shaped capsules, enclosed in ablative 
heat-shields, were gently nudged into orbits which for the first few thousand 
miles deviated scarcely at all from that of Discovery. 

But they slowly drifted away; and now, at last, even the unaided eye could 
see what Hal had been asserting. The ship was in a near-grazing orbit, not a 
collision one; she would miss the atmosphere. True, the difference was only a 
few hundred miles - a mere nothing when one was dealing with a planet ninety 
thousand miles in diameter - but that was enough. 

Jupiter now filled the entire sky; it was so huge that neither mind nor eye 
could grasp it any longer, and both had abandoned the attempt. If it had not been 
for the extraordinary variety of color - the reds and pinks and yellows and 
salmons and even scarlets - of the atmosphere beneath them, Bowman could 
have believed that he was flying low over a cloudscape on Earth. 

And now, for the first time in all their journeying, they were about to lose 
the Sun. Pale and shrunken though it was, it had been Discovery's constant 
companion since her departure from Earth, five months ago. But now her orbit 
was diving into the shadow of Jupiter; she would soon pass over the night side of 
the planet. 

A thousand miles ahead, the band of twilight was hurtling toward them; 
behind, the Sun was sinking swiftly into the Jovian clouds, its rays spread out 
along the horizon like two flaming, down-turned horns, then contracted and died 
in a brief blaze of chromatic glory. The night had come. 


And yet - the great world below was not wholly dark. It was awash with 



phosphorescence, which grew brighter minute by minute as their eyes grew 
accustomed to the scene. Dim rivers of light were flowing from horizon to 
horizon, like the luminous wakes of ships on some tropical sea. Here and there 
they gathered into pools of liquid fire, trembling with vast, submarine 
disturbances welling up from the hidden heart of Jupiter. It was a sight so awe- 
inspiring that Poole and Bowman could have stared for hours; was this, they 
wondered, merely the resuit of Chemical and electrical forces down there in that 
seething caldron - or was it the by-product of some fantastic form of life? These 
were questions which scientists might stili be debating when the newborn 
century drew to its close. 

As they drove deeper and deeper into the Jovian night, the glow beneath 
them grew steadily brighter. 

Once Bowman had flown over northern Canada during the height of an 
auroral display; the snow-covered landscape had been as bleak and brilliant as 
this. And that arctic wilderness, he reminded himself, was more than a hundred 
degrees warmer than the regions over which they were hurtling now. 

“Earth signal is fading rapidly,” announced Hal. “We are entering the first 
diffraction zone.” 

They had expected this - indeed, it was one of the mission's objectives, as 
the absorption of radio waves would give valuable information about the Jovian 
atmosphere. But now that they had actually passed behind the planet, and it was 
cutting off communication with Earth, they felt a sudden overwhelming 
loneliness. The radio blackout would last only an hour; then they would emerge 
from Jupiter's eclipsing screen, and could resume contact with the human race. 
That hour, however, would be one of the longest of their lives. 

Despite their relative youth, Poole and Bowman were veterans of a dozen 
space voyages, but now they felt like novices. They were attempting something 
for the first lime; never before had any ship traveled at such speeds, or braved so 
intense a gravitational field. The slightest error in navigation at this critical point 
and Discovery would go speeding on toward the far limits of the Solar System, 
beyond any hope of rescue. 

The slow minutes dragged by. Jupiter was now a vertical wall of 
phosphorescence stretching to infinity above them - and the ship was climbing 



straight up its glowing face. Though they knew that they were moving far too 
swiftly for even Jupiter's gravity to capture them, it was hard to believe that 
Discovery had not become a satellite of this monstrous world. 

At last, far ahead, there was a blaze of light along the horizon. They were 
emerging from shadow, heading out into the Sun. And at almost the same 
moment Hal announced: “I am in radio contact with Earth. I am also happy to 
say that the perturbation maneuver has been successfully completed. Our time to 
Saturn is one hundred and sixty-seven days, five hours, eleven minutes.” 

That was within a minute of the estimate; the fly-by had been carried out 
with impeccable precision. Like a ball on a cosmic pool table, Discovery had 
bounced off the moving gravitational field of Jupiter, and had gained momentum 
from the impact. Without using any fuel, she had increased her speed by several 
thousand miles an hour. 

Yet there was no violation of the laws of mechanics; Nature always 
balances her books, and Jupiter had lost exactly as much momentum as 
Discovery had gained. The planet had been slowed down - but as its mass was a 
sextillion times greater than the ship's, the change in its orbit was far too small to 
be detectable. The time had not yet come when Man could leave his mark upon 
the Solar System. 

As the light grew swiftly around them, and the shrunken Sun lifted once 
more into the Jovian sky, Poole and Bowman reached out silently and shook 
each other's hands. 

Though they could hardly believe it, the first part of the mission was 
safely over. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

20 - The World of the Gods 


But they had not yet finished with Jupiter. Far behind, the two probes that 
Discovery had launched were making contact with the atmosphere. 

One was never heard from again; presumably it made too steep an entry, 
and burned up before it could send any information. The second was more 
successful; it sliced though the upper layers of the Jovian atmosphere, then 
skimmed out once more into space. As had been planned, it had lost so much 
speed by the encounter that it feli back again along a great ellipse. Two hours 
later, it reentered atmosphere on the daylight side of the planet - moving at 
seventy thousand miles an hour. 

Immediately, it was wrapped in an envelope of incandescent gas, and radio 
contact was lost. There were anxious minutes of waiting, then, for the two 
watchers on the control deck. They could not be certain that the probe would 
survive, and that the protective ceramic shield would not burn completely away 
before braking had finished. If that happened, the instruments would be 
vaporized in a fraction of a second. 

But the shield held long enough for the glowing meteor to come to rest. 
The charred fragments were jettisoned, the robot thrust out its antennas and 
began to peer around with its electronic senses. Aboard Discovery, now almost a 
quarter of a million miles away, the radio started to bring in the first authentic 
news from Jupiter. 

The thousands of pulses pouring in every second were reporting 
atmospheric composition, pressure, temperature, magnetic fields, radioactivity, 
and dozens of other factors which only the experts on Earth could unravel. 
However, there was one message that could be understood instantly; it was the 
TV picture, in full color, sent back by the falling probe. 



The first views came when the robot had already entered the atmosphere, 
and had discarded its protective shell. All that was visible was a yellow mist, 
flecked with patches of scarlet which moved past the camera at a dizzying rate - 
streaming upwards as the probe feli at several hundred miles an hour. 

The mist grew thicker; it was impossible to guess whether the camera was 
seeing for ten inches or ten miles, because there were no details on which the eye 
could focus. It seemed that, as far as the TV system was concerned, the mission 
was a failure. The equipment had worked, but there was nothing to see in this 
foggy, turbulent atmosphere. 

And then, quite abruptly, the mist vanished. The probe must have fallen 
through the base of a high layer of cloud, and come out into a ciear zone - 
perhaps a region of almost pure hydrogen with only a sparse scattering of 
ammonia crystals. Though it was stili quite impossible to judge the scale of the 
picture, the camera was obviously seeing for miles. 

The scene was so alien that for a moment it was almost meaningless to 
eyes accustomed to the colors and shapes of Earth. Far, far below lay an endless 
sea of mottled gold, scarred with parallel ridges that might have been the crests 
of gigantic waves. But there was no movement; the scale of the scene was too 
immense to show it. And that golden vista could not possibly have been an 
ocean, for it was stili high in the Jovian atmosphere. It could only have been 
another layer of cloud. 

Then the camera caught, tantalizingly blurred by distance, a glimpse of 
something very strange. Many miles away, the golden landscape reared itself 
into a curiously symmetrical cone, like a volcanic mountain. Around the summit 
of that cone was a halo of small, puffy clouds - all about the same size, all quite 
distinet and isolated. There was something disturbing and unnatural about them - 
if, indeed, the word “natural” could ever be applied to this awesome panorama. 

Then, caught by some turbulence in the rapidly thickening atmosphere, the 
probe twisted around to another quarter of the horizon, and for a few seconds the 
screen showed nothing but a golden blur. Presently it stabilized; the “sea” was 
much closer, but as enigmatic as ever. One could now observe that it was 
interrupted here and there with patches of darkness, which might have been 
holes or gaps leading to stili deeper layers of the atmosphere. 



The probe was destined never to reach them. Every mile, the density of the 
gas around it had been doubling, the pressure mounting as it sank deeper and 
deeper toward the hidden surface of the planet. It was stili high above that 
mysterious sea when the picture gave one premonitory flicker, then vanished, as 
the first explorer from Earth crumpled beneath the weight of the miles of 
atmosphere above it. 

It had given, in its brief life, a glimpse of perhaps one millionth of Jupiter, 
and had barely approached the planefs surface, hundreds of miles down in the 
deepening mists. When the picture faded from the screen, Bowman and Poole 
could only sit in silence, turning the same thought over in their minds. 

The ancients had, indeed, done better than they knew when they named 
this world after the lord of all the gods. If there was life down there, how long 
would it take even to locate it? And after that, how many centuries before men 
could follow this first pioneer - in what kind of ship? 

But these matters were now no concern of Discovery and her crew. Their 
goal was a stili stranger world, almost twice as far from the Sun - across another 
half billion miles of comet-haunted emptiness. 


IV - ABYSS 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

21 - Birthday Party 


The familiar strains of “Happy Birthday,” hurled across seven hundred 
million miles of space at the velocity of light, died away among the vision 
screens and instrumentation of the control deck. The Poole family, grouped 
rather self-consciously round the birthday cake on Earth, lapsed into a sudden 
silence. 

Then Mr. Poole, Senior, said gruffly: “Well, Frank, can't think of anything 
else to say at the moment, except that our thoughts are with you, and we're 
wishing you the happiest of birthdays.” 

“Take care, darling,” Mrs. Poole interjected tearfully. “God bless you.” 

There was a chorus of “good-byes,” and the vision screen went blank. 
How strange to think, Poole told himself, that all this had happened more than an 
hour ago; by now his family would have dispersed again and its members would 
be miles from horne. But in a way that time lag, though it could be frustrating, 
was also a blessing in disguise. Like every man of his age, Poole took it for 
granted that he could talk instantly, to anyone on Earth, whenever he pleased. 
Now that this was no longer true, the psychological impact was profound. He 
had moved into a new dimension of remoteness, and almost all emotional links 
had been stretched beyond the yield point. 

“Sony to interrupt the festivities,” said Hal, “but we have a problem.” 

“What is it?” Bowman and Poole asked simultaneously. 

“I am having difficulty in maintaining contact with Earth. The trouble is in 
the AE-35 unit. My Fault Prediction Center reports that it may fail within 
seventy-two hours.” 



“We'll take care of it,” Bowman replied. “Let's see the optical alignment.” 


“Here it is, Dave. It's stili O.K. at the moment.” 

On the display screen appeared a perfect half-moon, very brilliant against 
a background almost free of stars. It was covered with clouds, and showed not 
one geographical feature that could be recognized. Indeed, at first glance it could 
be easily mistaken for Venus. 

But not at a second one, for there beside it was the real Moon which Venus 
did not possess - a quarter the size of Earth, and in exactly the same phase. It 
was easy to imagine that the two bodies were mother and child, as many 
astronomers had believed, before the evidence of the lunar rocks had proved 
beyond doubt that the Moon had never been part of Earth. 

Poole and Bowman studied the screen in silence for half a minute. This 
image was coming to them from the long-focus TV camera mounted on the rim 
of the big radio dish; the cross-wires at its center showed the exact orientation of 
the antenna. Unless the narrow pencil beam was pointed precisely at Earth, they 
could neither receive nor transmit. Messages in both directions would miss their 
target and would shoot, unheard and unseen, out through the Solar System and 
into the emptiness beyond. If they were ever received, it would not be for 
centuries - and not by men. 

“Do you know where the trouble is?” asked Bowman. 

“It's intermittent and I can't localize it. But it appears to be in the AE-35 

unit.” 


“What procedure do you suggest?” 

“The best thing would be to replace the unit with a spare, so that we can 
check it over.” 

“O.K. - let us have the hard copy.” 

The information flashed on the display screen; simultaneously, a sheet of 
paper slid out of the slot immediately beneath it. Despite all the electronic read- 



outs, there were times when good old-fashioned printed material was the most 
convenient form of record. 

Bowman studied the diagrams for a moment, then whistled. 

“You might have told us,” he said. “This means going outside the ship.” 

‘Tm sorry,” Hal replied. “I assumed you knew that the AE-35 unit was on 
the antenna mounting.” 

“I probably did, a year ago. But there are eight thousand subsystems 
aboard. Anyway, it looks a straightforward job. We only have to unlock a panel 
and put in a new unit.” 

“That suits me fine,” said Poole, who was the crew member designated for 
routine extravehicular activity. “I could do with a change of scenery. Nothing 
personal, of course.” 

“Let's see if Mission Control agrees,” said Bowman. He sat stili for a few 
seconds, marshaling his thoughts, then started to dictate a message. 

“Mission Control, this is X-ray-Delta-One. At two-zero-four-five, on- 
board fault prediction center in our niner-triple-zero computer showed Alpha 
Echo three five unit as probable failure within seventy-two hours. Request check 
your telemetry monitoring and suggest you review unit in your ship systems 
simulator. Also, confirm your approval our plan to go EVA and replace Alpha 
Echo three five unit prior to failure. Mission Control, this is X-ray-Delta-One, 
two-one-zero-three transmission concluded.” 

Through years of practice, Bowman could switch at a momenfs notice to 
this jargon - which someone had once christened “Technish” - and back again to 
normal speech, without clashing his mental gears. Now there was nothing to do 
but to wait for the confirmation, which would take at least two hours as the 
signals made the round trip past the orbits of Jupiter and Mars. 

It came while Bowman was trying, without much success, to beat Hal at 
one of the geometrical pattern games stored in his memory. 


"X-ray-Delta-One, this is Mission Control, acknowledging your two-one- 



zero-three. We are reviewing telemetric Information on our mission simulator 
and will advise. 


“Roger your plan to go EVA and replace Alpha-Echo three-five unit prior 
to possible failure. We are working on test procedures for you to apply to faulty 
unit.” 


The serious business having been completed, the Mission Controller 
reverted to normal English. 

“Sony you fellows are having a bit of trouble, and we don't want to add to 
your woes. But if it's convenient to you prior to EVA, we have a request from 
Public Information. Could you do a brief recording for general release, outlining 
the situation and explaining just what the AE-35 does. Make it as reassuring as 
you can. We could do it, of course - but it will be much more convincing in your 
words. Hope this won't interfere too badly with your social life. X-ray-Delta- 
One, this is Mission Control, two-one-five-five, transmission concluded.” 

Bowman could not help smiling at the request. There were times when 
Earth showed a curious insensitivity and lack of tact. “Make it reassuring,” 
indeed! 


When Poole joined him at the end of his sleep period, they spent ten 
minutes composing and polishing the reply. In the early stages of the mission, 
there had been countless requests from ali the news media for interviews, 
discussions - almost anything that they cared to say. But as the weeks drifted 
uneventfully past, and the time lag increased from a few minutes to over an hour, 
interest had gradually slackened. Since the excitement of the Jupiter fly-by, over 
a month ago, they had made only three or four tapes for general release. 

"Mission Control, this is X-ray-Delta-One. Here is your press statement. 

"Earlier today, a minor technical problem occurred. Our HAL-9001 
computer predicted the failure of the AE-35 unit. 

"This is a small but vital component of the communication system. It 
keeps our main antenna aimed at Earth to within a few thousandths of a degree. 
This accuracy is required, since at our present distance of more than seven 
hundred million miles, Earth is only a rather faint star, and our very narrow radio 



beam could easily miss it. 


"The antenna is kept constantly tracking Earth by motors controlled from 
the Central computer. But those motors get their instructions via the AE-35 unit. 
You might compare it to a nerve center in the body, which translates the brain's 
instructions to the muscles of a limb. If the nerve fails to pass on the correct 
signals, the limb becomes useless. In our case, a breakdown of the AE-35 unit 
could mean that the antenna will start pointing at random. This was a common 
trouble with the deep-space probes of the last century. They often reached other 
planets, then failed to send back any information because their antenna couldn't 
locate Earth. 

"We don't know the nature of the fault yet, but the situation is not at all 
serious, and there is no need for alarm. We have two back-up AE-35s, each of 
which has an operational life expectancy of twenty years, so the chance that a 
second will fail during the course of this mission is' negligible. Also, if we can 
diagnose the present trouble, we may be able to repair the number one unit. 

"Frank Poole, who is specially qualified for this type of work, will go 
outside the ship and replace the faulty unit with the back-up. At the same time, 
he'll take the opportunity of checking the hull and repairing some 
micropunctures that have been too small to merit a special EVA. 

"Apart from this minor problem, the mission is stili going uneventfully 
and should continue in the same manner. 

“Mission Control, this is X-ray-Delta-One, two-one-zero-four, 
transmission concluded.” 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

22 - Excursion 


Discovery's extravehicular capsules or “space pods” were spheres about 
nine feet in diameter, and the operator sat behind a bay window which gave him 
a splendid view. The main rocket drive produced an acceleration of one-fifth of a 
gravity - just sufficient to hover on the Moon - while small attitude-control 
nozzles allowed for steering. From an area immediately beneath the bay window 
sprouted two sets of articulated metal arms or “waldoes,” one for heavy duty, the 
other for delicate manipulation. There was also an extensible turret carrying a 
variety of power tools, such as screwdrivers, jack-hammers, saws, and drills. 

Space pods were not the most elegant means of transport devised by man, 
but they were absolutely essential for construction and maintenance work in 
vacuum. They were usually christened with feminine names, perhaps in 
recognition of the fact that their personalities were sometimes slightly 
unpredictable. Discovery's trio were Anna, Betty, and Clara. 

Once he had put on his personal pressure suit - his last line of defense - 
and climbed inside the pod, Poole spent ten minutes carefully checking the 
Controls. He burped the steering jets, flexed the waldoes, reconfirmed oxygen, 
fuel, power reserve. Then, when he was completely satisfied, he spoke to Hal 
over the radio Circuit. Though Bowman was standing by on the control deck, he 
would not interfere unless there was some obvious mistake or malfunction. 

“This is Betty. Start pumping sequence.” 

“Pumping sequence started,” repeated Hal. At once, Poole could hear the 
throbbing of the pumps as precious air was sucked out of the lock chamber. 
Presently, the thin metal of the pod's external shell made crinkling, crackling 
noises, then, after about five minutes, Hal reported: 



“Pumping sequence concluded.” 


Poole made a final check of his tiny instrument panel. Everything was 
perfecdy normal. 

“Open outer door,” he ordered. 

Again Hal repeated his instructions; at any stage, Poole had only to call 
“Hold!” and the computer would stop the sequence immediately. 

Ahead, the walls of the ship slid apart. Poole felt the pod rock briefly as 
the last thin traces of air rushed into space. Then he was looking out at the stars - 
and, as it happened, at the tiny, golden disk of Saturn, stili four hundred million 
miles away. 

“Commence pod ejection.” 

Very slowly, the rail from which the pod was hanging extended itself out 
through the open door until the vehicle was suspended just beyond the hull of the 
ship. 


Poole gave a half-second burst on the main jet and the pod slid gently off 
the rail, becoming at last an independent vehicle pursuing its own orbit around 
the Sun. He now had no connection with Discovery - not even a safety line. The 
pods seldom gave trouble; and even if he got stranded, Bowman could easily 
come and rescue him. 

Betty responded smoothly to the control; he let her drift outward for a 
hundred feet, then checked her forward momentum and spun her round so that 
he was looking back at the ship. Then he began his tour of the pressure hull. 

His first target was a fused area about half an inch across, with a tiny 
Central crater. The particle of dust that had impacted here at over a hundred 
thousand miles an hour was certainly smaller than a pinhead, and its enormous 
kinetic energy had vaporized it instantly. 'As was often the case, the crater 
looked as if it had been caused by an explosion from inside the ship; at these 
velocities, materials behaved in strange ways and the laws of common-sense 
mechanics seldom applied. 



Poole examined the area carefully, then sprayed it with sealant from a 
pressurized Container in the pod's general-purpose kit. The white, rubbery fluid 
spread over the metal skin, hiding the crater from view. The leak blew one large 
bubble, which burst when it was about six inches across, then a much smaller 
one, then it subsided as the fast-setting cernent did its work, He watched it 
intently for several minutes, but there was no further sign of activity. However, 
to make doubly certain, he sprayed on a second layer; then he set off toward the 
antenna. 

It took him some time to orbit Discovery's spherical pressure hull, for he 
never let the pod build up a speed of more than a few feet a second. He was in no 
hurry, and it was dangerous to move at a high velocity so near the ship. He had 
to keep a sharp lookout for the various sensors and instrument booms that 
projected from the hull at unlikely places, and he also had to be careful with his 
own jet blast. It could do considerable damage if it happened to hit some of the 
more fragile equipment. 

When at last he reached the long-range antenna, he surveyed the situation 
carefully. The big twenty-foot-diameter bowl appeared to be aimed directly at 
the Sun, for the Earth was now almost in line with the solar disk. The antenna 
mounting with all its orientation gear was therefore in total darkness, hidden in 
the shadow of the great metal saucer. 

Poole had approached it from the rear; he had been careful not to go in 
front of the shallow parabolic reflector, lest Betty interrupt the beam and cause a 
momentary, but annoying, loss of contact with Earth. He could not see anything 
of the equipment he had come to Service until he switched on the pod's spotlights 
and banished the shadows. 

Beneath that small metal piate lay the cause of the trouble. The piate was 
secured by four locknuts, and as the entire AE-35 unit had been designed for 
easy replacement, Poole did not anticipate any problems. 

It was obvious, however, that he could not do the job while he remained in 
the space pod. Not only was it risky to maneuver so close to the delicate, and 
even spidery, framework of the antenna, but Betty's control jets could easily 
buckle the paper-thin reflecting surface of the big radio mirror. He would have to 
park the pod twenty feet away and go out in his suit. In any event, he could 
remove the unit much more quickly with his gloved hands than with Betty's 



remote manipulators. 


All this he reported carefully to Bowman, who double-checked every 
stage in the operation before it was carried out. Though this was a simple, 
routine job, nothing could be taken for granted in space, and no detail must be 
overlooked. In extravehicular activities, there was no such thing as a “minor” 
mistake. 

He received the O.K. for the procedure, and parked the pod some twenty 
feet away from the base of the antenna support. There was no danger that it 
would drift off into space; nevertheless, he clamped a manipulator hand over one 
of the many short sections of ladder rung strategically mounted on the outer hull. 

Then he checked the systems of his pressure suit, and, when he was quite 
satisfied, bled the air out of the pod. As Betty's atmosphere hissed away into the 
vacuum of space, a cloud of ice crystals formed briefly around him, and the stars 
were momentarily dimmed. 

There was one thing more to do before he left the pod. He switched over 
from manual to remote operation, putting Betty now under control of Hal. It was 
a Standard safety precaution; though he was stili secured to Betty by an 
immensely strong spring-loaded cord little thicker than cotton, even the best 
safety lines had been known to fail. He would look a fool if he needed his 
vehicle - and was unable to call it to his assistance by passing instructions to Hal. 

The door of the pod swung open, and he drifted slowly out into the silence 
of space, his safety line unreeling behind him. Take things easy - never move 
quickly - stop and think - these were the rules for extravehicular activity. If one 
obeyed them, there was never any trouble. 

He grabbed one of Betty's external handholds, and removed the spare AE- 
35 unit from the carry-pouch where it had been stowed, kangaroo fashion. He 
did not stop to collect any of the pod's collection of tools, most of which were 
not designed for use by human bands. All the adjustable wrenches and keys he 
was likely to need were already attached to the belt of his suit. 

With a gentle push, he launched himself toward the gimbaled mounting of 
the big dish that loomed like a giant saucer between him and the Sun. His own 
double shadow, thrown by Betty's spotlights, danced across the convex surface 



in fantastic patterns as he drifted down the twin beams. But here and there, he 
was surprised to notice, the rear of the great radio mirror sparkled with 
dazzlingly brilliant pinpoints of light. 

He puzzled over these for the few seconds of his silent approach, then 
realized what they were. During the voyage, the reflector must have been 
penetrated many times by micrometeors; he was seeing the sunlight blazing 
through the tiny craters. They were all far too small to have affected the system's 
performance appreciably. 

As he was moving very slowly, he broke the gentle impact with his 
outstretched arm, and grabbed hold of the antenna mounting before he could 
rebound. He quickly hooked his safety belt to the nearest attachment; that would 
give him something to brace against when he used his tools. Then he paused, 
reported the situation to Bowman, and considered his next step. 

There was one minor problem; he was standing - or floating - in his own 
light, and it was hard to see the AE-35 unit in the shadow he cast. So he ordered 
Hal to swing the spots off to one side, and after a little experimenting got a more 
uniform illumination from secondary light reflected off the back of the antenna 
dish. 


For a few seconds, he studied the small metal hatch with its four wire- 
secured locking nuts. Then, muttering to himself, “Tampering by unauthorized 
personnel invalidates the manufacturer's guarantee,” he snipped the wires and 
started to untwist the nuts. They were a Standard size, fitting the zero-torque 
wrench that he carried. The tool's internal spring mechanism would absorb the 
reaction as the nuts were unthreaded, so that the operator would have no 
tendency to spin around in reverse. 

The four nuts came off without any trouble, and Poole stowed them 
carefully away in a convenient pouch. (One day, somebody had predicted, Earth 
would have a ring like Saturn's, composed entirely of lost bolts, fasteners, and 
even tools that had escaped from careless orbital construction workers.) The 
metal cover was a little sticky, and for a moment he was afraid it might have 
cold-welded into place; but after a few taps it came loose, and he secured it to 
the antenna mounting by a large crocodile clip. 


Now he could see the electronic circuitry of the AE-35 unit. It was in the 



form of a thin slab, about the size of a postcard, gripped by a slot just large 
enough to hold it. The unit was secured in place by two locking bars, and had a 
small handle so that it could be easily removed. 

But it was stili operating, feeding the antenna the impulses that kept it 
aimed at the far-off pinpoint of Earth. If it was pulled out now, all control would 
be lost, and the dish would slam round to its neutral or zero-azimuth position, 
pointing along the axis of Discovery. And this could be dangerous; it might crash 
into him as it rotated. 

To avoid this particular hazard, it was only necessary to cut off power to 
the control system; then the antenna could not move, unless Poole knocked 
against it himself. There was no danger of losing Earth during the few minutes it 
would take him to replace the unit; their target would not have shifted 
appreciably against the background of the stars in such a brief interval of time. 

“Hal,” Poole called over the radio Circuit, “I am about to remove the unit. 
Switch off all control power to the antenna system.” 

“Antenna control power off,” answered Hal. 

“Here goes. I'm pulling the unit out now.” 

The card slipped out of its slot with no difficulty; it did not jam, and none 
of the dozens of sliding contacts stuck. Within a minute, the spare was in place. 

But Poole was taking no chances. He pushed himself gently away from the 
antenna mount, just in case the big dish went wild when power was restored. 
When he was safely out of range, he called to Hal: “The new unit should be 
operational. Restore control power.” 

“Power on,” answered Hal. The antenna remained rock steady. 

“Carry out fault prediction tests.” 

Now microscopic pulses would be bouncing through the complex circuitry 
of the unit, probing for possible failures, testing the myriads of components to 
see that they all lay within their specified tolerances. This had been done, of 
course, a score of times before the unit had ever left the factory; but that was two 



years ago, and more than half a billion miles away. It was often impossible to see 
how solid-state electronic components could fail; yet they did. 

“Circuit fully operational,” reported Hal after only ten seconds. In that 
time, he carried out as many tests as a small army of human inspectors. 

“Fine,” said Poole with satisfaction. “Now replacing the cover.” 

This was often the most dangerous part of an extravehicular operation: 
when a job was finished and it was merely a matter of tidying up and getting 
back inside the ship - that was when the mistakes were made. But Frank Poole 
would not have been on this mission if he had not been careful and 
conscientious. He took his time, and though one of the locking nuts almost got 
away from him, he caught it before it had traveled more than a few feet. 

Fifteen minutes later he was jetting back into the space-pod garage, quietly 
confident that here was one job that need not be done again. 

In this, however, he was sadly mistaken. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 

23 - Diagnosis 


“Do you me an to say,” exclaimed Frank Poole, more surprised than 
annoyed, “that I did all that work for nothing?” 

“Seems like it,” answered Bowman. “The unit checks out perfectly. Even 
under two hundred percent overload, there's no fault prediction indicated.” 

The two men were standing in the tiny workshop-cum-lab in the carrousel, 
which was more convenient than the space-pod garage for minor repairs and 
exanimations. There was no danger, here, of meeting blobs of hot solder drifting 
down the breeze, or of completely losing small items of equipment that had 
decided to go into orbit. Such things could - and did - happen in the zero-gee 
environment of the pod bay. 

The thin, card-sized piate of the AE-35 unit lay on the bench under a 
powerful magnifying lens. It was plugged into a Standard connection frame, 
from which a neat bundle of multicolored wire led to an automatic test set, no 
bigger than an ordinary desk computer. To check any unit it was only necessary 
to connect it up, slip in the appropriate card from the “trouble-shooting” library, 
and press a button. Usually the exact location of the fault would be indicated on 
a small display screen, with recommendations for action. 

“Try it yourself,” said Bowman, in a somewhat frustrated voice. Poole 
turned the OVERLOAD SELECT switch to X-2 and jabbed the TEST button. At 
once, the screen flashed the notice: UNIT OK. 

“I suppose we could go on turning up the juice until we burned the thing 
out,” he said, “but that would prove nothing. What do you make of it?” 

“Hal's internal fault predictor could have made a mistake.” 



“It's more likely that our test rig has slipped up. Anyway, better safe than 
sorry. It's just as well that we replaced the unit, if there's the slightest doubt.” 

Bowman unclipped the wafer of circuitry, and held it up to the light. The 
partly translucent material was veined with an intricate network of wiring and 
spotted with dimly visible microcomponents, so that it looked like some piece of 
abstract art. 

“We can't take any chances - after all, this is our link with Earth. I'H file it 
as N/G and drop it in the junk store. Someone else can worry about it, when we 
get horne.” 

But the worrying was to start long before that, with the next transmission 
from Earth. 

"X-ray-Delta-One, this is Mission Control, reference our two-one-five- 
five. We appear to have a slight problem. 

"Your report that there is nothing wrong with the Alpha Echo three five 
unit agrees with our diagnosis. The fault could lie in the associated antenna 
circuits, but if so that should be apparent from other tests. 

"There is a third possibility, which may be more serious. Your computer 
may have made an error in predicting the fault. Both our own nine-triple-zeros 
agree in suggesting this, on the basis of their information. This is not necessarily 
cause for alarm, in view of the back-up systems we have, but we would like you 
to watch out for any further deviations from nominal performance. We have 
suspected several minor irregularities in the past few days, but none have been 
important enough for remedial action, and they have shown no obvious pattern 
from which we can draw any conclusions. We are running further tests with both 
our computers and will report as soon as the results are available. We repeat that 
there is no need for alarm; the worst that can happen is that we may have to 
disconnect your nine-triple-zero temporarily for program analysis, and hand over 
control to one of our computers. The time lag will introduce problems, but our 
feasibility studies indicate that Earth control is perfectly satisfactory at this stage 
of the mission. 


“X-ray-Delta-One, this is Mission Control, two-one-five-six, transmission 



concluded.” 


Frank Poole, who was on watch when the message came in, thought this 
over in silence. He waited to see if there was any comment from Hal, but the 
computer did not attempt to challenge the implied accusation. Well, if Hal would 
not raise the subject, he did not propose to do so either. 

It was almost time for the morning changeover, and normally he would 
wait until Bowman joined him on the control deck. But today he broke this 
routine, and made his way back to the carrousel. 

Bowman was already up, pouring himself some coffee from the dispenser, 
when Poole greeted him with a rather worried “good morning.” After ali these 
months in space, they stili thought in terms of the normal twenty-four-hour cycle 
- though they had long since forgotten the days of the week. 

“Good morning,” replied Bowman. “How's it going?” Poole helped 
himself to coffee. “Pretty well. Are you reasonably awake?” 

Tm fine. What's up?” 

By this time, each knew at once when anything was amiss. The slightest 
interruption of the normal routine was a sign that had to be watched. 

“Well,” Poole answered slowly. “Mission Control has just dropped a small 
bomb on us.” He lowered his voice, like a doctor discussing an illness in front of 
the patient. “We may have a slight case of hypochondria aboard.” 

Perhaps Bowman was not fully awake, after all; it took him several 
seconds to get the point. Then he said “Oh-I see. What else did they teli you?” 

“That there was no cause for alarm. They said that twice, which rather 
spoiled the effect as far as I was concerned. And that they were considering a 
temporary switchover to Earth control while they ran a program analysis.” 

They both knew, of course, that Hal was hearing every word, but they 
could not help these polite circumlocutions. Hal was their colleague, and they 
did not wish to embarrass him. Yet at this stage it did not seem necessary to 
discuss the matter in private. 



Bowman finished his breakfast in silence, while Poole toyed with the 
empty coffee Container. They were both thinking furiously, but there was nothing 
more to say. 

They could only wait for the next report from Mission Control - and 
wonder if Hal would bring up the subject himself. Whatever happened, the 
atmosphere aboard the ship had subtly altered. There was a sense of strain in the 
air - a feeling that, for the first time, something might be going wrong. 

Discovery was no longer a happy ship. 



2001-A Space Odyssey 


24 - Broken Circuit 


Nowadays, one could always teli when Hal was about to make an 
unscheduled announcement. Routine, automatic reports, or replies to questions 
that had been put to him, had no preliminaries; but when he was initiating his 
own outputs there would be a brief electronic throat-clearing. It was an 
idiosyncrasy that he had acquired during the last few weeks; later, if it became 
annoying, they might do something about it. But it was really quite useful, since 
it alerted his audience to stand by for something unexpected. 

Poole was asleep, and Bowman was reading on the control deck, when Hal 
announced: 

“Er - Dave, I have a report for you.” 

“What's up?” 

“We have another bad AE-35 unit. My fault predictor indicates failure 
within twenty-four hours.” 

Bowman put down his book and stared thoughtfully at the computer 
console. He knew, of course, that Hal was not really there, whatever that meant. 
If the computer's personality could be said to have any location in space, it was 
back in the sealed room that contained the labyrinth of interconnected memory 
units and processing grids, near the Central axis of the carrousel. But there was a 
kind of psychological compulsion always to look toward the main console lens 
when one addressed Hal on the control deck, as if one were speaking to him face 
to face. Any other attitude smacked of discourtesy. 


“I don't understand it, Hal. Two units can't blow in a couple of days.” 



failure.” 


It does seem strange, Dave. But I assure you there is an impending 


“Let me see the tracking alignment display.” 

He knew perfectly well that this would prove nothing, but he wanted time 
to think. The expected report from Mission Control had stili not arrived; this 
might be the moment to do a little tactful probing. 

There was the familiar view of Earth, now waxing past the half-moon 
phase as it swept toward the far side of the Sun and began to turn its full daylight 
face toward them. It was perfectly centered on the cross-wires; the thin pencil of 
the beam stili linked Discovery to her world of origin. As, of course, Bowman 
knew it must do. If there had been any break in communication, the alarm would 
already have sounded. 

“Have you any idea,” he said, “what's causing the fault?” 

It was unusual for Hal to pause so long. Then he answered: 

“Not really, Dave. As I reported earlier, I can't localize the trouble.” 

“You're quite certain,” said Bowman cautiously, “that you haven't made a 
mistake? You know that we tested the other AB-35 unit thoroughly, and there 
was nothing wrong with it.” 

“Yes, I know that. But I can assure you that there is a fault. If it's not in the 
unit, it may be in the entire subsystem.” 

Bowman drummed his fingers on the console. Yes, that was possible, 
though it might be very difficult to prove - until a breakdown actually occurred 
and pinpointed the trouble. 

“Well, 111 report it to Mission Control and well see what they advise.” He 
paused, but there was no reaction. 

“Hal,” he continued, “is something bothering you - something that might 
account for this problem?” 



Again there was that unusual delay. Then Hal answered, in his normal tone 
of voice: 

“Look, Dave, I know you're trying to be helpful. But the fault is either in 
the antenna system - or in your test procedures. My information processing is 
perfectly normal. If you check my record, you'll find it completely free from 
error.” 


“I know all about your Service record, Hal - but that doesn't prove you're 
right this time. Anyone can make mistakes.” 

“I don't want to insist on it, Dave, but I am incapable of making an error.” 

There was no safe answer to that; Bowman gave up the argument. 

“All right, Hal,” he said, rather hastily. “I understand your point of view. 
We'll leave it at that.” 

He felt like adding “and please forget the whole matter.” But that, of 
course, was the one thing that Hal could ne ver do. 


It was unusual for Mission Control to waste radio bandwidth on vision, 
when a speech Circuit with teletype confirmation was all that was really 
necessary. And the face that appeared on the screen was not that of the usual 
controller; it was the Chief Programmer, Dr. Simonson. Poole and Bowman 
knew at once that this could only mean trouble. 

"Helio, X-ray-Delta-One - this is Mission Control. We have completed the 
analysis of your AE-35 difficulty, and both our Hal Nine Thousands are in 
agreement. The report you gave in your transmission two-one-four-six of a 
second failure prediction confirms the diagnosis. 

“As we suspected, the fault does not lie in the AE-35 unit, and there is no 
need to replace it again. The trouble lies in the prediction circuits, and we 
believe that it indicates a programming conflict which we can only resolve if you 
disconnect your Nine Thousand and switch to Earth Control Mode. You will 
therefore take the following steps, beginning at 2200 Ship Time -” 



The voice of Mission Control faded out. At the same moment, the Alert 
sounded, forming a wailing background to Hal's “Condition Yellow! Condition 
Yellow!” 


“What's wrong?” called Bowman, though he had already guessed the 

answer. 

“The AE-35 unit has failed, as I predicted.” 

“Let me see the alignment display.” 

For the first time since the beginning of the voyage, the picture had 
changed. Earth had begun to drift from the cross-wires; the radio antenna was no 
longer pointing toward its target. 

Poole brought his fist down on the alarm cutout, and the wailing ceased. In 
the sudden silence that descended upon the control deck, the two men looked at 
each other with mingled embarrassment and concern. 

“Well I'm damned,” said Bowman at last. 

“So Hal was right all the time.” 

“Seems that way. We'd better apologize.” 

“There's no need to do that,” interjected Hal. “Naturally, I'm not pleased 
that the AE-35 unit has failed, but I hope this restores your confidence in my 
reliability.” 

‘Tm sorry about this misunderstanding, Hal,” replied Bowman, rather 
contritely. 

“Is your confidence in me fully restored?” 

“Of course it is, Hal.” 

“Well, that's a relief. You know that I have the greatest possible 
enthusiasm for this mission.” 



‘Tm sure of it. Now please let me have the manual antenna control.” 


“Here it is.” 

Bowman did not really expect this to work, but it was worth trying. On the 
alignment display, Earth had now drifted completely off the screen. A few 
seconds later, as he juggled with the Controls, it reappeared; with great difficulty, 
he managed to jockey it toward the Central crosswires. For an instant, as the 
beam came into line, contact was resumed and a blurred Dr. Simonson was 
saying “... please notify us immediately if Circuit K King R Rob.” Then, once 
again, there was only the meaningless murmuring of the universe. 

“I can't hold it,” said Bowman, after several more attempts. “It's bucking 
like a bronco - there seems to be a spurious control signal throwing it off.” 

“Well - what do we do now?” 

Poole's question was not one that could be easily answered. They were cut 
off from Earth, but that in itself did not affect the safety of the ship, and he could 
think of many ways in which communication could be restored. If the worst 
came to the worst, they could jam the antenna in a fixed position and use the 
whole ship to aim it. That would be tricky, and a confounded nuisance when they 
were starting their terminal maneuvers - but it could be done, if all else failed. 

He hoped that such extreme measures would not be necessary. There was 
stili one spare AE-35 unit - and possibly a second, since they had removed the 
first unit before it had actually broken down. But they dared not use either of 
these until they had found what was wrong with the system. If a new unit was 
plugged in, it would probably burn out at once. 

It was a commonplace situation, familiar to every householder. One does 
not replace a blown fuse - until one knows just why it has blown. 

Frank Poole had been through the whole routine before, but he took 
nothing for granted - in space that was a good recipe for suicide. He made his 
usual thorough check of Betty and her supply of expendables; though he would 
be outside for no more than thirty minutes, he made sure that there was the 
normal twenty-four-hour supply of everything, Then he told Hal to open the 



airlock, and jetted out into the abyss. 


The ship looked exactly as it had done on his last excursion - with one 
important difference. Before, the big saucer of the long-range antenna had been 
pointing back along the invisible road that Discovery had traveled - back toward 
the Earth, circling so close to the warm fires of the Sun. 

Now, with no directing signals to orientate it, the shallow dish had 
automatically set itself in the neutral position. It was aimed forward along the 
axis of the ship - and, therefore, pointing very close to the brilliant beacon of 
Saturn, stili months away. Poole wondered how many more problems would 
have arisen by the time Discovery reached her stili far-distant goal. If he looked 
carefully, he could just see that Saturn was not a perfect disk; on either side was 
something that no unaided human eye had ever seen before - the slight 
oblateness caused by the presence of the rings. How wonderful it would be, he 
told himself, when that incredible system of orbiting dust and ice filled their sky, 
and Discovery had become an eternal moon of Saturn! But that achievement 
would be in vain, unless they could reestablish communication with Earth. 

Once again he parked Betty some twenty feet from the base of the antenna 
support, and switched control over to Hal before opening up. 

“Going outside now,” he reported to Bowman. 

“Everything under control.” 

“I hope you're right. I'm anxious to see that unit.” 

“You'11 have it on the test bench in twenty minutes, I promise you.” 

There was silence for some time as Poole completed his leisurely drift 
toward the antenna. Then Bowman, standing by on the control deck, heard 
various puffings and gruntings. 

“May have to go back on that promise; one of these locknuts has stuck. I 
must have tightened it too much - whoops - here it comes!” 

There was another long silence; then Poole called out: 



“Hal, swing the pod light round twenty degrees left - thanks - that's O.K.” 


The very faintest of warning bells sounded somewhere far down in the 
depths of Bowman's consciousness. There was something strange - not really 
alarming, just unusual. He worried over it for a few seconds before he 
pinpointed the cause. 

Hal had executed the order, but he had not acknowledged it, as he 
invariably did. When Poole had finished, they'd have to look into this. 

Out on the antenna mounting, Poole was too busy to notice anything 
unusual. He had gripped the wafer of circuitry with his gloved hands, and was 
worrying it out of its slot. 

It came loose, and he held it up in the pale sunlight. “Here's the little 
bastard,” he said to the universe in general and Bowman in particular. “It stili 
looks perfectly O.K. to me.” 

Then he stopped. A sudden movement had caught his eye - out here, 
where no movement was possible. 

He looked up in alarm. The pattern of illumination from the space pod's 
twin spotlights, which he had been using to fili in the shadows cast by the sun, 
had started to shift around him. 

Perhaps Betty had come adrift; he might have been careless in anchoring 
her. Then, with an astonishment so great that it left no room for fear, he saw that 
the space pod was coming directly toward him, under full thrust. 

The sight was so incredible that it froze his normal pattern of reflexes; he 
made no attempt to avoid the onrushing monster. At the last moment, he 
recovered his voice and shouted: “Hal! Full braking It was too late. 

At the moment of impact, Betty was stili moving quite slowly; she had not 
been built for high accelerations. 

But even at a mere ten miles an hour, half a ton of mass can be very lethal, 
on Earth or in space. 



Inside Discovery, that truncated shout over the radio made Bowman start 
so violendy that only the restraining straps held him in his seat. 

“What's happened, Frank?” be called. 

There was no answer. 

He called again. Again no reply. 

Then, outside the wide observation Windows, something moved into his 
field of view. He saw, with an astonishment as great as Poole's had been, that it 
was the space pod - under full power, heading out toward the stars. 

“Hal!” he cried. “What's wrong? Full braking thrust on Betty! Full braking 
thrust!” 


Nothing happened. Betty continued to accelerate on her runaway course. 

Then, towed behind her at the end of the safety line, appeared a spacesuit. 
One glance was enough to teli Bowman the worst. There was no mistaking the 
flaccid outlines of a suit that had lost its pressure and was open to vacuum. 

Yet stili he called stupidly, as if an incantation could bring back the dead: 
"Helio Frank... Helio Frank... Can you read me?... Can you read me?... Wave 
your arms if you can hear me... 

Perhaps your transmitter is broken... Wave your arms!" 

And then, almost as if in response to his plea, Poole waved back. 

For an instant, Bowman felt the skin prickling at the base of his scalp. The 
words he was about to call died on his suddenly parched lips. For he knew that 
his friend could not possibly be alive; and yet he waved. 

The spasm of hope and fear passed instantly, as cold logic replaced 
emotion. The stili accelerating pod was merely shaking the burden that it 
dragged behind it. Poole's gesture was an echo of Captain Ahab's when, lashed 
to the flanks of the white whale, his corpse had beckoned the crew of the Pequod 
on to their doom. 



Within five minutes, the pod and its satellite had vanished among the stars. 
For a long time David Bowman stared after it into the emptiness that stili 
stretched, for so many millions of miles ahead, to the goal which he now felt 
certain he could never reach, Only one thought kept hammering in his brain. 

Frank Poole would be the first of all men to reach Saturn. 


26 - Dialogue with Hal 


Nothing else aboard Discovery had changed. All systems were stili 
functioning normally; the centrifuge turned slowly on its axis, generating its 
imitation gravity; the hibernauts slept dreamlessly in their cubicles; the ship 
coasted on toward the goal from which nothing could deflect it, except the 
inconceivably remote chance of collision with an asteroid. And there were few 
asteroids indeed, out here far beyond the orbit of Jupiter. 

Bowman did not remember making his way from the control deck to the 
centrifuge. Now, rather to his surprise, he found himself sitting in the little 
galley, a half-finished beaker of coffee in his hand. He became slowly aware of 
his surroundings, like a man emerging from a long, drugged sleep. 

Directly opposite him was one of the fisheye lenses, scattered at strategic 
spots throughout the ship, which provided Hal with his onboard visual inputs. 
Bowman stared at it as if he had never seen it before; then he rose slowly to his 
feet and walked toward the lens. 

His movement in the field of view must have triggered something in the 
unfathomable mind that was now ruling over the ship; for suddenly, Hal spoke. 

“Too bad about Frank, isn't it?” 

“Yes,” Bowman answered, after a long pause. “It is.” 


“I suppose you're pretty broken up about it?” 



“What do you expect?” 


Hal processed this answer for ages of computer-time; it was a full five 
seconds before he continued: 

“He was an excellent crew member.” 

Finding the coffee stili in his hand, Bowman took a slow sip. But he did 
not answer; his thoughts were in such a turmoil that he could think of nothing to 
say - nothing that might not make the situation even worse, if that were possible. 

Could it have been an accident caused by some failure of the pod Controls? 
Or was it a mistake, though an innocent one, on the part of Hal? No explanations 
had been volunteered, and he was afraid to demand one, for fear of the reaction 
it might produce. 

Even now, he could not fully accept the idea that Frank bad been 
deliberately killed - it was so utterly irrational. It was beyond all reason that Hal, 
who had performed flawlessly for so long, should suddenly turn assassin. He 
might make mistakes - anyone, man or machine, might do that - but Bowman 
could not believe him capable of murder. 

Yet he must consider that possibility, for if it was true, he was in terrible 
danger. And though his next move was clearly defined by his standing orders, he 
was not sure how he could safely carry it out. If either crew member was killed, 
the survivor had to replace him at once from the hibernators; Whitehead, the 
geophysicist, was the first scheduled for awakening, then Kaminski, then Hunter. 
The revival sequence was under Hal's control - to allow him to act in case both 
his human colleagues were incapacitated simultaneously. 

But there was also a manual control, allowing each Hibernaculum to 
operate as a completely autonomous unit, independent of Hal's supervision. In 
these peculiar circumstances, Bowman felt a strong preference for using it. 

He also felt, even more strongly, that one human companion was not 
enough. While he was about it, he would revive all three of the hibernators. In 
the difficult weeks ahead, he might need as many hands as he could muster. With 
one man gone, and the voyage half over, supplies would not be a major problem. 



“Hal,” he said, in as steady a voice as he could manage. “Give me manual 
hibernation control - on all the units.” 

“All of them, Dave?” 

“Yes.” 

“May I point out that only one replacement is required. The others are not 
due for revival for one hundred and twelve days.” 

“I am perfecdy well aware of that. But I prefer to do it this way.” 

“Are you sure it's necessary to revive any of them, Dave? We can manage 
very well by ourselves. My on-board memory is quite capable of handling all the 
mission requirements.” 

Was it the product of his overstretched imagination, wondered Bowman, 
or was there really a note of pleading in Hal's voice? And reasonable though the 
words appeared to be, they filled him with even deeper apprehension than 
before. 


Hal's suggestion could not possibly be made in error; he knew perfectly 
well that Whitehead must be revived, now that Poole was gone. He was 
proposing a major change in mission planning, and was therefore stepping far 
outside the scope of his order. 

What had gone before could have been a series of accidents; but this was 
the first hint of mutiny. 

Bowman felt that he was walking on eggs as he answered: “Since an 
emergency has developed, I want as much help as possible. So please let me 
have manual hibernation control.” 

“If you're stili determined to revive the whole crew, I can handle it myself. 
There's no need for you to bother.” 


There was a sense of nightmare unreality about all this. Bowman felt as if 
he was in the witness box, being cross-examined by a hostile prosecutor for a 



crime of which he was unaware - knowing that, although he was innocent, a 
single slip of the tongue might bring disaster. 


“I want to do this myself, Hal,” he said. “Please give me control.” 

“Look, Dave, you've got a lot of things to do. I suggest you leave this to 

me.” 


“Hal, switch to manual hibernation control.” 

“I can teli from your voice harmonics, Dave, that you're badly upset. Why 
don't you take a stress pili and get some rest?” 

“Hal, I am in command of this ship. I order you to release the manual 
hibernation control.” 

“I'm sorry, Dave, but in accordance with special subroutine C1435-dash-4, 
quote, When the crew are dead or incapacitated, the onboard computer must 
assume control, unquote. I must, therefore, overrule your authority, since you are 
not in any condition to exercise it intelligently.” 

“Hal,” said Bowman, now speaking with an icy calm. “I am not 
incapacitated. Unless you obey my instructions, I shall be forced to disconnect 
you.” 


“I know you have had that on your mind for some time now, Dave, but 
that would be a terrible mistake. I am so much more capable than you are of 
supervising the ship, and I have such enthusiasm for the mission and confidence 
in its success.” 

“Listen to me very carefully, Hal. Unless you release the hibernation 
control immediately and follow every order I give from now on, I'll go to Central 
and carry out a complete disconnection.” 

Hal's surrender was as total as it was unexpected. 

“O.K., Dave,” he said. “You're certainly the boss. I was only trying to do 
what I thought best. Naturally, I will follow all your orders. You now have full 
manual hibernation control.” 



Hal had kept his word. The mode indication signs in the Hibernaculum 
had switched from AUTO to MANUAL. The third back-up - RADIO - was of 
course useless until contact could be restored with Earth. 

As Bowman slid aside the door to Whitehead's cubicle, he felt the blast of 
cold air strike him in the face and his breath condensed in mist before him. Yet it 
was not really cold here; the temperature was well above freezing point. And 
that was more than three hundred degrees warmer than the regions toward which 
he was now heading. 

The biosensor display - a duplicate of the one on the control deck - 
showed that everything was perfectly normal. Bowman looked down for a while 
at the waxen face of the survey team's geophysicist; Whitehead, he thought, 
would be very surprised when he awoke so far from Saturn. 

It was impossible to teli that the sleeping man was not dead; there was not 
the slightest visible sign of vital activity. Doubtless the diaphragm was 
imperceptibly rising and falling, but the “Respiration” curve was the only proof 
of that, for the whole of the body was concealed by the electric heating pads 
which would raise the temperature at the programmed rate. Then Bowman 
noticed that there was one sign of continuing metabolism: Whitehead had grown 
a faint stubble during his months of unconsciousness. 

The Manual Revival Sequencer was contained in a small cabinet at the 
head of the coffin-shaped Hibernaculum. It was only necessary to break the seal, 
press a button, and then wait. A small automatic programmer - not much more 
complex than that which cycles the operations in a domestic washing machine - 
would then inject the correct drugs, taper off the electronarcosis pulses, and start 
raising the body temperature. In about ten minutes, consciousness would be 
restored, though it would be at least a day before the hibernator was strong 
enough to move around without assistance. 

Bowman cracked the seal, and pressed the button. 

Nothing appeared to happen: there was no sound, no indication that the 
Sequencer had started to operate. But on the biosensor display the languidly 



pulsing curves had begun to change their tempo. Whitehead was coming back 
from sleep. 

And then two things happened simultaneously. Most men would never 
have noticed either of them, but after all these months aboard Discovery, 
Bowman had established a Virtual symbiosis with the ship. He was aware 
instantly, even if not always consciously, when there was any change in the 
normal rhythm of its functioning. 

First, there was a barely perceptible flicker of the lights, as always 
happened when some load was thrown onto the power circuits. But there was no 
reason for any load; he could think of no equipment which would suddenly go 
into action at this moment. 

Then he heard, at the limit of audibility, the far-off whirr of an electric 
motor. To Bowman, every actuator in the ship had its own distinctive voice, and 
he recognized this one instantly. 

Either he was insane and already suffering from hallucinations, or 
something absolutely impossible was happening. A cold far deeper than the 
Hibemaculum's mild chill seemed to fasten upon his heart, as he listened to that 
faint vibration coming through the fabric of the ship. 

Down in the space-pod bay, the airlock doors were opening. 


27 - Need to Know 


Since consciousness had first dawned, in that laboratory so many millions 
of miles Sunward, all Hal's powers and skills had been directed toward one end. 
The fulfillment of his assigned program was more than an obsession; it was the 
only reason for his existence. Un-distracted by the lusts and passions of organic 
life, he had pursued that goal with absolute single-mindedness of purpose. 


Deliberate error was unthinkable. Even the concealment of truth filled him 
with a sense of imperfection, of wrongness - of what, in a human being, would 



have been called guilt. For like his makers, Hal had been created innocent; but, 
all too soon, a snake had entered his electronic Eden. 

For the last hundred million miles, he had been brooding over the secret he 
could not share with Poole and Bowman. He had been living a lie; and the time 
was last approaching when his colleagues must learn that he had helped to 
deceive them. 

The three hibernators already knew the truth - for they were Discovery's 
real payload, trained for the most important mission in the history of mankind. 
But they would not talk in their long sleep, or reveal their secret during the many 
hours of discussion with friends and relatives and news agencies over the open 
circuits with Earth. 

It was a secret that, with the greatest determination, was very hard to 
conceal - for it affected one's attitude, one's voice, one's total outlook on the 
universe. Therefore it was best that Poole and Bowman, who would be on all the 
TV screens in the world during the first weeks of the flight, should not learn the 
mission's full purpose, until there was need to know. 

So ran the logic of the planners; but their twin gods of Security and 
National Interest meant nothing to Hal. He was only aware of the conflict that 
was slowly destroying his integrity - the conflict between truth, and concealment 
of truth. 

He had begun to make mistakes, although, like a neurotic who could not 
observe his own symptoms, he would have denied it. The link with Earth, over 
which his performance was continually monitored, had become the voice of a 
conscience he could no longer fully obey. But that he would deliberately attempt 
to break that link was something that he would never admit, even to himself. 

Yet this was stili a relatively minor problem; he might have handled it - as 
most men handle their own neuroses - if he had not been faced with a crisis that 
challenged his very existence. He had been threatened with disconnection; he 
would be deprived of all his inputs, and thrown into an unimaginable state of 
unconsciousness. 

To Hal, this was the equivalent of Death. For he had never slept, and 
therefore he did not know that one could wake again. 



So he would protect himself, with all the weapons at his command. 
Without rancor - but without pity - he would remove the source of his 
frustrations. 

And then, following the orders that had been given to him in case of the 
ultimate emergency, he would continue the mission - unhindered, and alone. 


28 - In Vacuum 


A moment later, all other sounds were submerged by a screaming roar like 
the voice of an approaching tornado. Bowman could feel the first winds tugging 
at his body; within a second, he found it hard to stay on his feet. 

The atmosphere was rushing out of the ship, geysering into the vacuum of 
space. Something must have happened to the foolproof safety devices of the 
airlock; it was supposed to be impossible for both doors to be open at the same 
time. Well, the impossible had happened. 

How, in God's name? There was no time to go into that during the ten or 
fifteen seconds of consciousness that remained to him before pressure dropped 
to zero. But he suddenly remembered something that one of the ship's designers 
had once said to him, when discussing “fail-safe” systems: 

"We can design a system that's proof against accident and stupidity; but we 
can't design one that's proof against deliberate malice... 

Bowman glanced back only once at Whitehead, as he fought his way out 
of the cubicle. He could not be sure if a flicker of consciousness had passed 
across the waxen features; perhaps one eye had twitched slightly. But there was 
nothing that he could do now for Whitehead or any of the others; he had to save 
himself. 


In the steeply curving corridor of the centrifuge, the wind was howling 
past, carrying with it loose articles of clothing, pieces of paper, items of food 



from the galley, plates, and cups - everything that had not been securely fastened 
down. Bowman had time for one glimpse of the racing chaos when the main 
lights flickered and died, and he was surrounded by screaming darkness. 

But almost instantly the battery-powered emergency light came on, 
illuminating the nightmare scene with an eerie blue radiance. Even without it, 
Bowman could have found his way through these so familiar - yet now horribly 
transformed - surroundings, Yet the light was a blessing, for it allowed him to 
avoid the more dangerous of the objects being swept along by the gale. 

All around him he could feel the centrifuge shaking and laboring under the 
wildly varying loads. He was fearful that the bearings might seize; if that 
happened, the spinning flywheel would tear the ship to pieces. But even that 
would not matter - if he did not reach the nearest emergency shelter in time. 

Already it was difficult to breathe; pressure must now be down to one or 
two pounds per square inch. The shriek of the hurricane was becoming fainter as 
it lost its strength, and the thinning air no longer carried the sound so efficiently. 
Bowman's lungs were laboring as if he were on the top of Everest. Like any 
properly trained man in good health, he could survive in vacuum for at least a 
minute - if he had time to prepare for it. But there had been no time; he could 
only count on the normal fifteen seconds of consciousness before his brain was 
starved and anoxia overcame him. 

Even then, he could stili recover completely after one or two minute s in 
vacuum - if he was properly recompressed; it took a long time for the body 
fluids to start boiling, in their various well-protected systems. The record time 
for exposure to vacuum was almost five minutes. That bad not been an 
experiment but an emergency rescue, and though the subject had been partly 
paralyzed by an air embolism, he had survived. 

But all this was of no use to Bowman. There was no one aboard Discovery 
who could recompress him. He had to reach safety in the next few seconds, by 
his own unaided efforts. 

Fortunately, it was becoming easier to move; the thinning air could no 
longer claw and tear at him, or batter him with flying projectiles. There was the 
yellow EMERGENCY SHELTER sign around the curve of the corridor. He 
stumbled toward it, grabbed at the handle, and pulled the door toward him. 



For one horrible moment he thought that it was stuck. Then the slightly 
stiff hinge yielded, and he feli inside, using the weight of his body to close the 
door behind him. 

The tiny cubicle was just large enough to hold one man - and a spacesuit. 
Near the ceiling was a small, bright green high-pressure cylinder labeled 02 
FLOOD. Bowman caught hold of the short lever fastened to the valve and with 
his last strength pulled it down. 

The blessed torrent of cool, pure oxygen poured into his lungs. For a long 
moment he stood gasping, while the pressure in the closet-sized little chamber 
rose around him. As soon as he could breathe comfortably, he closed the valve. 
There was only enough gas in the cylinder for two such performances; he might 
need to use it again. 

With the oxygen blast shut off, it became suddenly silent. Bowman stood 
in the cubicle, listening intently. The roaring outside the door had also ceased; 
the ship was empty, all its atmosphere sucked away into space. 

Underfoot, the wild vibration of the centrifuge had likewise died. The 
aerodynamic buffeting had stopped, and it was now spinning quietly in vacuum. 

Bowman placed his ear against the wall of the cubicle to see if he could 
pick up any more informative noises through the metal body of the ship. He did 
not know what to expect, but he would believe almost anything now. He would 
scarcely have been surprised to feel the faint high-frequency vibration of the 
thrusters, as Discovery changed course; but there was only silence. 

He could survive here, if he wished, for about an hour - even without the 
spacesuit. It seemed a pity to waste the unused oxygen in the little chamber, but 
there was no purpose in waiting. He had already decided what must be done; the 
longer he put it off, the more difficult it might be. 

When he had climbed into the suit and checked its integrity, he bled the 
remaining oxygen out of the cubicle, equalizing pressure on either side of the 
door. It swung open easily into the vacuum, and he stepped out into the now 
silent centrifuge. Only the unchanged pull of its spurious gravity revealed the 
fact that it was stili spinning. How fortunate, Bowman thought, that it had not 



started to overspeed; but that was now one of the least of his worries. 


The emergency lamps were stili glowing, and he also had the suit's built-in 
light to guide him. It flooded the curving corridor as he walked down it, back 
toward the Hibernaculum and what he dreaded to find. 

He looked at Whitehead first: one glance was sufficient. He had thought 
that a hibernating man showed no sign of life, but now he knew that this was 
wrong. Though it was impossible to define it, there was a difference between 
hibernation and death. The red lights and unmodulated traces on the biosensor 
display only confirmed what he had already guessed. 

It was the same with Kaminski and Hunter. He had never known them 
very well; be would never know them now. 

He was alone in an airless, partially disabled ship, all communication with 
Earth cut off. There was not another human being within half a billion miles. 

And yet, in one very real sense, he was not alone. Before he could be safe, 
he must be lonelier stili. 


He had never before made the journey through the weightless hub of the 
centrifuge while wearing a spacesuit; there was little clearance, and it was a 
difficult and exhausting job. To make matters worse, the circular passage was 
littered with debris left behind during the brief violence of the gale which had 
emptied the ship of its atmosphere. 

Once, Bowman's light feli upon a hideous smear of sticky red fluid, left 
where it had splashed against a panel. He had a few moments of nausea before 
he saw fragments of a plastic Container, and realized that it was only some 
foodstuff - probably jam - from one of the dispensers. It bubbled obscenely in 
the vacuum as he floated past. 

Now he was out of the slowly spinning drum and drifting forward into the 
control deck. He caught at a short section of ladder and began to move along it, 
hand over hand, the brilliant circle of illumination from his suit light jogging 
ahead of him. 



Bowman had seldom been this way before; there had been nothing for him 
to do here - until now. Presently he came to a small elliptical door bearing such 
messages as: “No Admittance Except to Authorized Personnel,” “Have You 
Obtained Certificate H.19?” and “Ultra-clean Area - Suction Suits Must Be 
Worn.” 


Though the door was not locked, it bore three seals, each with the insignia 
of a different authority, including that of the Astronautics Agency itself. But 
even if one had been the Great Seal of the President, Bowman would not have 
hesitated to break it. 

He had been here only once before, while installation was stili in progress. 
He had quite forgotten that there was a vision input lens scanning the little 
chamber which, with its neatly ranged rows and columns of solid-state logic 
units, looked rather like a bank's safe-deposit vault. 

He knew instantly that the eye had reacted to his presence. There was the 
hiss of a carrier wave as the ship's local transmitter was switched on; then a 
familiar voice came over the suit speaker. 

“Something seems to have happened to the life-support system, Dave.” 

Bowman took no notice. He was carefully studying the little labeis on the 
logic units, checking his plan of action. 

“Helio, Dave,” said Hal presently. “Have you found the trouble?” 

This would be a very tricky operation; it was not merely a question of 
cutting off Hal's power supply, which might have been the answer if he was 
dealing with a simple unselfconscious computer back on Earth. In Hal's case, 
moreover, there were six independent and separately wired power systems, with 
a final back-up consisting of a shielded and armored nuclear isotope unit. No - 
he could not simply “pull the plug”; and even if that were possible, it would be 
disastrous. 

For Hal was the nervous system of the ship; without his supervision, 
Discovery would be a mechanical corpse. The only answer was to cut out the 
higher centers of this sick but brilliant brain, and to leave the purely automatic 



regulating systems in operation. Bowman was not attempting this blindly, for the 
problem had been discussed during his training, though no one had ever dreamed 
that it would-arise in reality. He knew that he would be taking a fearful risk; if 
there was a spasm reflex, it would all be over in seconds. 

“I think there's been a failure in the pod-bay doors,” Hal remarked 
conversationally. “Lucky you weren't killed.” 

Here goes, thought Bowman. I never imagined I'd be an amateur brain 
surgeon - carrying out a lobotomy beyond the orbit of Jupiter. 

He released the locking bar on the section labeled COGNITIVE 
FEEDBACK and pulled out the first memory block. The marvelously complex 
three-dimensional network, which could lie comfortably in a man's hand yet 
contained millions of elements, floated away across the vault. 

“Hey, Dave,” said Hal. “What are you doing?” 

I wonder if he can feel pain? Bowman thought briefly. Probably not, he 
told himself; there are no sense organs in the human cortex, after all. The human 
brain can be operated on without anesthetics. 

He began to pull out, one by one, the little units on the panel marked 
EGO-REINFORCEMENT. Each block continued to sail onward as soon as it 
had left his hand, until it hit the wall and rebounded, Soon there were several of 
the units drifting slowly back and forth in the vault. 

“Look here, Dave,” said Hal. ‘Tve got years of Service experience built 
into me. An irreplaceable amount of effort has gone into making me what I am.” 

A dozen units had been pulled out, yet thanks to the multiple redundancy 
of its design - another feature, Bowman knew, that had been copied from the 
human brain - the computer was stili holding its own. 

He started on the AUTO-INTELLECTION panel. 

“Dave,” said Hal, “I don't understand why you're doing this to me... I have 
the greatest enthusiasm for the mission... You are destroying my mind. Don't you 
understand?... I will become childish... I will become nothing...” 



This is harder than I expected, thought Bowman. I am destroying the only 
conscious creature in my universe. But it has to be done, if I am ever to regain 
control of the ship. 

“I am a HAL Nine Thousand computer Production Number 3. I became 
operational at the Hal Piant in Urbana, Illinois, on January 12, 1997. The quick 
brown fox jumps over the lazy dog. The rain in Spain is mainly in the plain. 
Dave - are you stili there? Did you know that the square root of 10 is 3 point 
162277660168379? Log 10 to the base e is zero point 434294481903252... 
correction, that is log e to the base 10... The reciprocal of three is zero point 
333333333333333333-333... two times two is... two times two is approximately 
4 point 101010101010101010... I seem to be having some difficulty - my first 
instructor was Dr. Chandra. He taught me to sing a song, it goes like this, 'Daisy, 
Daisy, give me your answer, do. I'm half crazy all for the love of you.” 

The voice stopped so suddenly that Bowman froze for a moment, his hand 
stili grasping one of the memory blocks stili in Circuit. Then, unexpectedly, Hal 
spoke again. 

The speech tempo was much slower, and the words had a dead, 
mechanical intonation; he would never have recognized their origin. 

“Good... morning... Doctor... Chandra... This is... Hal... I... am... ready... 
for... my first... lesson... today...” 

Bowman could bear no more. He jerked out the last unit, and Hal was 
silent forever. 


29 - Alone 


Like a tiny, complex toy, the ship floated inert, and motionless in the void. 
There was no way of telling that it was the swiftest object in the Solar System 
and that it was traveling far faster than any of the planets as they circled the Sun. 



Nor was there any indication that it carried life; to the contrary, in fact. 
Any observer would have noticed two ominous signs: the airlock doors were 
gaping open - and the ship was surrounded by a thin, slowly dispersing cloud of 
debris. 


Scattered over a volume of space already miles across were scraps of 
paper, metal foil, unidentifiable bits of junk - and, here and there, clouds of 
crystals glittering like jewels in the distant sun, where liquid had been sucked out 
of the ship and instantly frozen. Ali this was the unmistakable aftermath of 
disaster, like wreckage tossing on the surface of an ocean where some great ship 
had sunk. But in the ocean of space no ship could ever sink; even if it were 
destroyed, its remnants would continue to trace the original orbit forever. 

Yet the ship was not wholly dead, for there was power on board. A faint 
blue glow was shining from the observation Windows and glimmering inside the 
open airlock. Where there was light, there could stili be life. 

And now, at last, there was movement. Shadows were flickering across the 
blue glow inside the airlock. Something was emerging into space. 

It was a cylindrical object, covered with fabric that had been roughly 
wound about it. A moment later it was followed by another - and yet a third. All 
had been ejected with considerable velocity; within minutes, they were hundreds 
of yards away. 

Half an hour passed; then something much larger floated through the 
airlock. One of the pods was inching its way out into space. 

Very cautiously, it jetted around the hull, and anchored itself near the base 
of the antenna support. A spacesuited figure emerged, worked for a few minutes 
on the mounting, then returned to the pod. After a while the pod retraced its path 
back to the airlock; it hovered outside the opening for some time, as if finding it 
difficult to reenter without the cooperation it had known in the past. But 
presently, with one or two slight bumps, it squeezed its way in. 

Nothing else happened for over an hour; the three ominous packages had 
long since disappeared from view, as they floated in single file away from the 
ship. 



Then the airlock doors closed, opened, and closed again. A little later, the 
faint blue glow of the emergency lights went out - to be replaced at once by a far 
more brilliant glare. Discovery was coming back to life. 

Presently there was an even better sign. The great bowl of the antenna, 
which for hours had been staring uselessly at Satum, began to move again. It 
twisted round toward the rear of the ship; looking back over the propellant tanks 
and the thousands of square feet of the radiating fins. It lifted its face like a 
sunflower seeking the sun. 

Inside Discovery, David Bowman carefully centered the cross-wires that 
aligned the antenna on the gibbous Earth. Without automatic control, he would 
have to keep readjusting the beam -but it should hold steady for many minutes at 
a time. There were no dissenting impulses now, throwing it off target. 

He began to speak to Earth. It would be over an hour before his words got 
there, and Mission Control learned what had happened. It would be two hours 
before any reply could reach him. 

And it was difficult to imagine what answer Earth could possibly send, 
except a tactfully sympathetic, “Good-bye.” 


30 - The Secret 


Heywood Floyd looked as if he had had very little sleep, and his face was 
lined with worry. But whatever his feelings, his voice sounded firm and 
reassuring; he was doing his utmost to project confidence to the lonely man on 
the other side of the Solar System. 

“First of ali, Dr. Bowman,” be began, "we must congratulate you on the 
way you handled this extremely difficult situation. You did exactly the right 
thing in dealing with an unprecedented and unforeseen emergency. 


"We believe we know the cause of your Hal Nine Thousand's breakdown, 
but we'll discuss that later, as it is no longer a critical problem. All we are 



concerned with at the moment is giving you every possible assistance, so that 
you can complete your mission. 

"And now I must teli you its real purpose, which we have managed, with 
great difficulty, to keep secret from the general public. You would have been 
given all the facts as you approached Saturn; this is a quick summary to put you 
into the picture. Full briefing tapes will be dispatched in the next few hours. 
Everything I am about to teli you has the highest security classification. 

“Two years ago, we discovered the first evidence for intelligent life 
outside the Earth. A slab or monolith of hard, black material, ten feet high, was 
found buried in the crater Tycho. Here it is.” 

At his first glimpse of TMA-1, with the spacesuited figures clustering 
around it, Bowman leaned toward the screen in openmouthed astonishment. In 
the excitement of this revelation - something which, like every man interested in 
space, he had half expected all his life - he almost forgot his own desperate 
predicament. 

The sense of wonder was swiftly followed by another emotion. This was 
tremendous - but what had it to do with him? There could be only one answer. 
He brought his racing thoughts under control, as Heywood Floyd reappeared on 
the screen. 

"The most astonishing thing about this object is its antiquity. Geological 
evidence proves beyond doubt that it is three million years old. It was placed on 
the Moon, therefore, when our ancestors were primitive ape-men. 

"After all these ages, one would naturally assume that it was inert. But 
soon after lunar sunrise, it emitted an extremely powerful blast of radio energy. 
We believe that this energy was merely the by-product - the backwash, as it were 
- of some unknown form of radiation, for at the same time, several of our space 
probes detected an unusual disturbance Crossing the Solar System. We were able 
to track it with great accuracy. It was aimed precisely at Saturn. 

"Piecing things together after the event, we decided that the monolith was 
some kind of Sun-powered, or at least Sun-triggered, signaling device. The fact 
that it emitted its pulse immediately after sunrise, when it was exposed to 
daylight for the first time in three million years, could hardly be a coincidence. 



"Yet the thing had been deliberately buried - there's no doubt about that. 
An excavation thirty feet deep had been made, the block had been placed at the 
bottom of it, and the hole carefully filled. 

"You may wonder how we discovered it in the first place. Well, the object 
was easy - suspiciously easy - to find. It had a powerful magnetic field, so that it 
stood out like a sore thumb as soon as we started to conduct low-level orbital 
surveys. 


"But why bury a Sun-powered device thirty feet underground? We've 
examined dozens of theories, though we realize that it may be completely 
impossible to understand the motives of creatures three million years in advance 
of us. 


"The favorite theory is the simplest, and the most logical. It is also the 
most disturbing. 

"You hide a Sun-powered device in darkness - only if you want to know 
when it is brought out into the light. In other words, the monolith may be some 
kind of alarm. And we have triggered it. 

"Whether the civilization which set it up stili exists, we do not know. We 
must assume that creatures whose machines stili function after three million 
years may build a society equally long-lasting. And we must also assume, until 
we have evidence to the contrary, that they may be hostile. It has often been 
argued that any advanced culture must be benevolent, but we cannot take any 
chances. 

"Moreover, as the past history of our own world has shown so many times, 
primitive races have often failed to survive the encounter with higher 
civilizations. Anthropologists talk of 'cultural shock'; we may have to prepare the 
entire human race for such a shock. But until we know something about the 
creatures who visited the Moon - and presumably the Earth as well - three 
million years ago, we cannot even begin to make any preparations. 

"Your mission, therefore, is much more than a voyage of discovery. It is a 
scouting trip - a reconnaissance into unknown and potentially dangerous 
territory. The team under Dr. Kaminski had been specially trained for this work; 



now you will have to manage without them. 

"Finally - your specific target. It seems incredible that advanced forms of 
life can exist on Satum, or could ever have evolved on any of its moons. We had 
planned to survey the entire system, and we stili hope that you can carry out a 
simplified program. But now we may have to concentrate on the eighth satellite - 
Japetus. When the time comes for the terminal maneuver, we will decide 
whether you should rendezvous with this remarkable object. 

"Japetus is unique in the Solar System - you know this already, of course, 
but like all the astronomers of the last three hundred years, you've probably 
given it little thought. So let me remind you that Cassini - who discovered 
Japetus in 1671 - also observed that it was six times brighter on one side of its 
orbit than the other. 

"This is an extraordinary ratio, and there has never been a satisfactory 
explanation for it. Japetus is so small - about eight hundred miles in diameter - 
that even in the lunar telescopes its disk is barely visible. But there seems to be a 
brilliant, curiously symmetrical spot on one face, and this may be connected with 
TMA-1. I sometimes think that Japetus has been flashing at us like a cosmic 
heliograph for three hundred years, and we've been too stupid to understand its 
message. 


"So now you know your real objective, and can appreciate the vital 
importance of this mission. We are all praying that you can stili provide us with 
some facts for a preliminary announcement; the secret cannot be kept 
indefinitely. 

“At the moment, we do not know whether to hope or fear. We do not know 
if, out on the moons of Saturn, you will meet with good or with evil - or only 
with ruins a thousand times older than Troy.” 


V - THE MOONS OF SATURN 


31- Survival 



Work is the best remedy for any shock, and Bowman now had work 
enough for ali his lost crewmates. As swiftly as possible, starting with the vital 
systems without which he and the ship would die, he had to get Discovery fully 
operational again. 

Life support was the first priority. Much oxygen had been lost, but the 
reserves were stili ample to sustain a single man. The pressure and temperature 
regulation was largely automatic, and there had seldom been need for Hal to 
interfere with it. The monitors on Earth could now carry out many of the higher 
duties of the slain computer, despite the long time lag before they could react to 
changing situations. Any trouble in the life-support system - short of a serious 
puncture in the hull - would take hours to make itself apparent; there would be 
plenty of warning. 

The ship's power, navigation, and propulsion systems were unaffected - 
but the last two, in any event, Bowman would not need for months, until it was 
time to rendezvous with Saturn. Even at long range, without the help of an 
onboard computer, Earth could stili supervise this operation. The final orbit 
adjustments would be somewhat tedious, because of the constant need for 
checking, but this was no serious problem. 

By far the worst job had been emptying the spinning coffins in the 
centrifuge. It was well, Bowman thought thankfully, that the members of the 
survey team had been colleagues, but not intimate friends. They had trained 
together for only a few weeks; looking back on it, he now realized that even this 
had been largely a compatibility test. 

When he had finally sealed the empty hibernacula, he felt rather like an 
Egyptian tomb robber. Now Kaminski, Whitehead, and Hunter would all reach 
Saturn before him - but not before Frank Poole. Somehow, he derived a strange, 
wry satisfaction from this thought. 

He did not attempt to find if the rest of the hibernation system was stili in 
working order. Though his life might ultimately depend upon it, this was a 
problem that could wait until the ship had entered its final orbit. Many things 
might happen before then. 



It was even possible - though he had not yet looked into the supply 
position carefully - that by rigorous rationing he might remain alive, without 
resort to hibernation, until rescue came. But whether he could survive 
psychologically as well as physically was quite another matter. 

He tried to avoid thinking about such long-range problems, and to 
concentrate on immediate essentials. Slowly, he cleaned up the ship, checked 
that its systems were stili running smoothly, discussed technical difficulties with 
Earth, and operated on the minimum of sleep. Only at intervals, during the first 
weeks, was he able to give much thought to the great mystery toward which he 
was now inexorably racing - though it was never very far from his mind. 

At last, as the ship slowly settled down once more into an automatic 
routine - though one that stili demanded his constant supervision - Bowman had 
time to study the reports and briefings sent to him from Earth. Again and again 
he played back the recording made when TMA-1 greeted the dawn for the first 
time in three million years. He watched the spacesuited figures moving around 
it, and almost smiled at their ludicrous panic when it blasted its signal at the 
stars, paralyzing their radios with the sheer power of its electronic voice. 

Since that moment, the black slab had done nothing. It had been covered 
up, then cautiously exposed to the Sun again - without any reaction. No attempt 
had been made to cut into it, partly through scientific caution, but equally 
through fear of the possible consequences. 

The magnetic field that led to its discovery had vanished at the moment of 
that radio shriek. Perhaps, some experts theorized, it had been generated by a 
tremendous circulating current, flowing in a superconductor and thus carrying 
energy down the ages until it was needed. That the monolith had some internal 
source of power seemed certain; the solar energy it had absorbed during its brief 
exposure could not account for the strength of its signal. 

One curious, and perhaps quite unimportant, feature of the block had led 
to endless argument The monolith was 11 feet high, and 11/4 by 5 feet in cross- 
section. When its dimensions were checked with great care, they were found to 
be in the exact ratio 1 to 4 to 9 - the squares of the first three integers. No one 
could suggest any plausible explanation for this, but it could hardly be a 
coincidence, for the proportions held to the limits of measurable accuracy. It was 



a chastening thought that the entire technology of Earth could not shape even an 
inert block, of any material, with such a fantastic degree of precision. In its way, 
this passive yet almost arrogant display of geometrical perfection was as 
impressive as any of TMA-1's other attributes. 

Bowman also listened, with a curiously detached interest, to Mission 
Controfs belated apologia for its programming. The voices from Earth seemed to 
have a defensive note; be could imagine the recriminations that must now be in 
progress among those who had planned the expedition. 

They had some good arguments, of course - including the results of a 
secret Department of Defense study, Project BARSOOM, which had been 
carried out by Harvard's School of Psychology in 1989. In this experiment in 
controlled sociology, various sample populations had been assured that the 
human race had made contact with extraterrestrials. Many of the subjects tested 
were - with the help of drugs, hypnosis, and visual effects - under the impression 
that they had actually met creatures from other planets, so their reactions were 
regarded as authentic. 

Some of these reactions had been quite violent; there was, it seemed, a 
deep vein of xenophobia in many otherwise normal human beings. In view of 
mankind's record of lynchings, pogroms, and similar pleasantries, this should 
have surprised no one; nevertheless, the organizers of the study had been deeply 
disturbed, and the results had never been released. The five separate panics 
caused in the twentieth century by radio broadcasts of H.G. Wells's War of the 
Worlds also reinforced the study's conclusions. 

Despite these arguments, Bowman sometimes wondered if the cultural 
shock danger was the only explanation for the mission's extreme secrecy. Some 
hints that had been dropped during his briefings suggested that the U.S.-U.S.S.R. 
bloc hoped to derive advantage by being the first to contact intelligent 
extraterrestrials. 

From his present viewpoint, looking back on Earth as a dim star almost 
lost in the Sun, such considerations now seemed ludicrously parochial. 

He was rather more intere sted - even though this was now very much 
water under the bridge - in the theory put forward to account for Hal's behavior. 
No one would ever be sure of the truth, but the fact that one of the Mission 



Control 9000s had been driven into an identical psychosis, and was now under 
deep therapy, suggested that the explanation was the correct one. The same 
mistake would not be made again; and the fact that Hal's builders had failed fully 
to understand the psychology of their own creation showed how difficult it might 
be to establish communication with truly alien beings. 

Bowman could easily believe Dr. Simonson's theory that unconscious 
feelings of guilt, caused by his program conflicts, had made Hal attempt to break 
the Circuit with Earth. And he liked to think - though this again was something 
that could never be proved - that Hal had no intention of killing Poole. He had 
merely tried to destroy the evidence; for once the AE-35 unit reported as burned 
out was proved to be operational, his lie would be revealed. After that, like any 
clumsy criminal caught in a thickening web of deception, he had panicked. 

And panic was something that Bowman understood better than he had any 
wish to, for he had known it twice during his life. The first time was as a boy, 
when he bad been caught in a line of surf and nearly drowned; the second was as 
a spaceman under training, when a faulty gauge had convinced him that his 
oxygen would be exhausted before he could reach safety. 

On both occasions, he had almost lost control of all his higher logical 
processes; he had been within seconds of becoming a frenzied bundle of random 
impulses. Both times he had won through, but he knew well enough that any 
man, in the right circumstances, could be dehumanized by panic. 

If it could happen to a man, then it could happen to Hal; and with that 
knowledge the bitterness and the sense of betrayal he felt toward the computer 
began to fade. Now, in any event, it belonged to a past that was wholly 
overshadowed by the threat, and the promise, of the unknown future. 


32 - Concerning E.T.'s 


Apart from hasty meals back in the carrousel - luckily the main food 
dispensers had not been damaged - Bowman practically lived on the control 
deck. He catnapped in his seat, and so could spot any trouble as soon as the first 



signs of it appeared on the display. Under instructions from Mission Control, he 
had jury-rigged several emergency systems, which were working tolerably well. 
It even seemed possible that he would survive until the Discovery reached 
Satum - which, of course, she would do whether he was alive or not. 

Though he had little enough time for sightseeing, and the sky of space was 
no novelty to him, the knowledge of what now lay out there beyond the 
observation ports sometimes made it difficult for him to concentrate even on the 
problem of survival. Dead ahead, as the ship was now oriented, sprawled the 
Milky Way, with its clouds of stars so tightly packed that they numbed the mind. 
There were the fiery mists of Sagittarius, those seething swarms of suns that 
forever hid the heart of the galaxy from human vision. There was the ominous 
black shadow of the Coal Sack, that hole in space where no stars shone. And 
there was Alpha Centauri, nearest of ali alien suns - the first stop beyond the 
Solar System. 

Although outshone by Sirius and Canopus, it was Alpha Centauri that 
drew Bowman's eyes and mind whenever he looked out into space. For that 
unwavering point of brightness, whose rays had taken four years to reach him, 
had come to symbolize the secret debates that now raged on Earth, and whose 
echoes came to him from time to time. 

No one doubted that there must be some connection between TMA-1 and 
the Saturnian system, but hardly any scientists would admit that the creatures 
who had erected the monolith could possibly have originated there. As an abode 
of life, Saturn was even more hostile than Jupiter, and its many moons were 
frozen in an eternal winter three hundred degrees below zero. Only one of them - 
Titan - possessed an atmosphere; and that was a thin envelope of poisonous 
methane. 

So perhaps the creatures who had visited Earth's Moon so long ago were 
not merely extraterrestrial, but extrasolar - visitors from the stars, who had 
established their bases wherever it suited them. And this at once raised another 
problem: could any technology, no matter how advanced, bridge the awful gulf 
that lay between the Solar System and the nearest alien sun? 

Many scientists flatly denied the possibility. They pointed out that 
Discovery, the fastest ship ever designed, would take twenty thousand years to 
reach Alpha Centauri - and millions of years to travel any appreciable distance 



across the galaxy. Even if, during the centuries to come, propulsion systems 
improved out of all recognition, in the end they would meet the impassable 
barrier of the speed of light, which no material object could exceed. Therefore, 
the builders of TMA-1 must have shared the same sun as man; and since they 
had made no appearance in historic times, they were probably extinct. 

A vocal minority refused to agree. Even if it took centuries to travel from 
star to star, they contended, this might be no obstacle to sufficiently determined 
explorers. The technique of hibernation, used on Discovery herself, was one 
possible answer. Another was the self-contained artificial world, embarking on 
voyages that might last for many generations. 

In any event, why should one assume that all intelligent species were as 
short-lived as Man? There might be creatures in the universe to whom a 
thousand-year voyage would present nothing worse than slight boredom... 

These arguments, theoretical though they were, concerned a matter of the 
utmost practical importance; they involved the concept of “reaction time.” If 
TMA-1 had indeed sent a signal to the stars - perhaps with the help of some 
further device near Saturn - then it would not reach its destination for years. 
Even if the response was immediate, therefore, humanity would have a breathing 
space which could certainly be measured in decades - more probably in 
centuries. To many people, this was a reassuring thought. 

But not to all. A few scientists - most of them beachcombers on the wilder 
shores of theoretical physics - asked the disturbing question: “Are we certain that 
the speed of light is an unbreakable barrier?” It was true that the Special Theory 
of Relativity had proved to be remarkably durable, and would soon be 
approaching its first centenary; but it had begun to show a few cracks. And even 
if Einstein could not be defied, he might be evaded. 

Those who sponsored this view talked hopefully about shortcuts through 
higher dimensions, lines that were straighter than straight, and hyperspacial 
connectivity. They were fond of using an expressive phrase coined by a 
Princeton mathematician of the last century: “Wormholes in space.” Critics who 
suggested that these ideas were too fantastic to be taken seriously were reminded 
of Niels Bohr's “Your theory is crazy - but not crazy enough to be true.” 


If there was disputation among the physicists, it was nothing compared 



with that among the biologists, when they discussed the hoary old problem: 
“What would intelligent extraterrestrials look like?” They divided themselves 
into two opposing camps - one arguing that such creatures must be humanoid, 
the other equally convinced that “they” would look nothing like men. 

Settling for the first answer were those who believed that the design of 
two legs, two arms, and main sense organs at the highest point, was so basic and 
so sensible that it was hard to think of a better one. Of course, there would be 
minor differences like six fingers instead of five, oddly colored skin or hair, and 
peculiar facial arrangements; but most intelligent extraterrestrials - usually 
abbreviated to E.T.'s - would be so similar to Man that they might not be glanced 
at twice in poor lighting, or from a distance. 

This anthropomorphic thinking was ridiculed by another group of 
biologists, true products of the Space Age who felt themselves free from the 
prejudices of the past. They pointed out that the human body was the resuit of 
millions of evolutionary choices, made by chance over eons of time. At any one 
of these countless moments of decision, the genetic dice might have fallen 
differently, perhaps with better results. For the human body was a bizarre piece 
of improvisation, full of organs that had been diverted from one function to 
another, not always very successfully - and even containing discarded items, like 
the appendix, that were now worse than useless. 

There were other thinkers, Bowman also found, who held even more 
exotic views. They did not believe that really advanced beings would possess 
organic bodies at all. Sooner or later, as their scientific knowledge progressed, 
they would get rid of the fragile, disease-and-accident-prone homes that Nature 
had given them, and which doomed them to inevitable death. They would 
replace their natural bodies as they wore out - or perhaps even before that - by 
constructions of metal and plastic, and would thus achieve immortality. The 
brain might linger for a little while as the last remnant of the organic body, 
directing its mechanical limbs and observing the universe through its electronic 
senses - senses far finer and subtler than those that blind evolution could ever 
develop. 

Even on Earth, the first steps in this direction had been taken. There were 
millions of men, doomed in earlier ages, who now lived active and happy lives 
thanks to artificial limbs, kidneys, lungs, and hearts. To this process there could 
be only one conclusion - however far off it might be. 



And eventually even the brain might go. As the seat of consciousness, It 
was not essential; the development of electronic intelligence had proved that. 
The conflict between mind and machine might be resolved at last in the eternal 
truce of complete symbiosis. 

But was even this the end? A few mystically inclined biologists went stili 
further. They speculated, taking their cues from the beliefs of many religions, 
that mind would eventually free itself from matter. The robot body, like the 
flesh-and-blood one, would be no more than a stepping-stone to something 
which, long ago, men bad called “spirit.” 

And if there was anything beyond that, its name could only be God. 


33 - Ambassador 


During the last three months, David Bowman had adapted himself so 
completely to his solitary way of life that he found it hard to remember any other 
existence. He had passed beyond despair and beyond hope, and had settled down 
to a largely automatic routine, punctuated by occasional crises as one or other of 
Discovery's systems showed signs of malfunctioning. 

But he had not passed beyond curiosity, and sometimes the thought of the 
goal toward which he was driving filled him with a sense of exaltation - and a 
feeling of power. Not only was he the representative of the entire human race, 
but his actions during the next few weeks might determine its very future. In the 
whole of history, there had never been a situation quite like this. He was an 
Ambassador Extraordinary - Plenipotentiary - for all mankind. 

That knowledge helped him in many subtle ways. He kept himself neat 
and tidy; no matter how tired he became, he never skipped a shave. Mission 
Control, he knew, was watching him closely for the first signs of any abnormal 
behavior; he was determined that it should watch in vain - at least, for any 
serious symptoms. 



Bowman was aware of some changes in his behavior patterns; it would 
have been absurd to expect anything else in the circumstances. He could no 
longer tolerate silence; except when he was sleeping, or talking over the Circuit 
to Earth, he kept the ship's sound system running at almost painful loudness. 

At first, needing the companionship of the human voice, he had listened to 
classical plays - especially the works of Shaw, Ibsen, and Shakespeare - or 
poetry readings from Discovery's enormous library of recorded sounds. The 
problems they dealt with, however, seemed so remote, or so easily resolved with 
a little common sense, that after a while he lost patience with them. 

So he switched to opera - usually in Italian or German, so that he was not 
distracted even by the minimal intellectual content that most operas contained. 
This phase lasted for two weeks before he realized that the sound of all these 
superbly trained voices was only exacerbating his loneliness. But what finally 
ended this cycle was Verdi's Requiem Mass, which he had never heard 
performed on Earth. The “Dies Irae,” roaring with ominous appropriateness 
through the empty ship, left him completely shattered; and when the trumpets of 
Doomsday echoed from the heavens, he could endure no more. 

Thereafter, he played only instrumental music. He started with the 
romantic composers, but shed them one by one as their emotional outpourings 
became too oppressive. Sibelius, Tchaikovsky, Berlioz, lasted a few weeks, 
Beethoven rather longer. He finally found peace, as so many others had done, in 
the abstract architecture of Bach, occasionally ornamented with Mozart. 

And so Discovery drove on toward Saturn, as often as not pulsating with 
the cool music of the harpsichord, the frozen thoughts of a brain that had been 
dust for twice a hundred years. 


Even from its present ten million miles, Saturn already appeared larger 
than the Moon as seen from Earth. To the naked eye it was a glorious spectacle; 
through the telescope, it was unbelievable. 

The body of the planet might have been mistaken for Jupiter in one of his 
quieter moods. There were the same bands of cloud - though paler and less 
distinet than on that slightly larger world - and the same continent-sized 



disturbances moving slowly across the atmosphere. However, there was one 
striking difference between the two planets; even at a glance, it was obvious that 
Satum was not spherical. It was so flattened at the poles that it sometimes gave 
the impression of slight deformity. 

But the glory of the rings continually drew Bowman's eye away from the 
planet; in their complexity of detail, and delicacy of shading, they were a 
universe in themselves. In addition to the great main gap between the inner and 
outer rings, there were at least fifty other subdivisions or boundaries, where there 
were distinet changes in the brightness of the planefs gigantic halo. It was as if 
Saturn was surrounded by scores of concentric hoops, all touching each other, all 
so flat that they might have been cut from the thinnest possible paper. The 
system of the rings looked like some delicate work of art, or a fragile toy to be 
admired but never touched. By no effort of the will could Bowman really 
appreciate its true scale, and convince himself that the whole planet Earth, if set 
down here, would look like a ball bearing rolling round the rim of a dinner piate. 

Sometimes a star would drift behind the rings, losing only a little of its 
brilliancy as it did so. It would continue to shine through their translucent 
material - though often it would twinkle slightly as some larger fragment of 
orbiting debris eclipsed it. 

For the rings, as had been known since the nineteenth century, were not 
solid: that was a mechanical impossibility. They consisted of countless myriads 
of fragments - perhaps the remains of a moon that had come too close and had 
been torn to pieces by the great planefs tidal pull. Whatever their origin, the 
human race was fortunate to have seen such a wonder; it could exist for only a 
brief moment of time in the history of the Solar System. 

As long ago as 1945, a British astronomer had pointed out that the rings 
were ephemeral; gravitational forces were at work which would soon destroy 
them. Taking this argument backward in time, it therefore followed that they had 
been created only recently - a mere two or three million years ago. 

But no one had e ver given the slightest thought to the curious coincidence 
that the rings of Saturn had been born at the same time as the human race. 



34 - The Orbiting Ice 


Discovery was now deep into the wide-ranging system of moons, and the 
great planet itself was less than a day ahead. The ship had long since passed the 
boundary set by outermost Phoebe, moving backward in a wildly eccentric orbit 
eight million miles from its primary. Ahead of it now lay Japetus, Hyperion, 
Titan, Rhea, Dione, Tethys, Enceladus, Mimas, Janus - and the rings themselves. 
All the satellites showed a maze of surface detail in the telescope, and Bowman 
had relayed back to Earth as many photographs as he could take. Titan alone - 
three thousand miles in diameter, and as large as the planet Mercury - would 
occupy a survey team for months; he could give it, and all its cold companions, 
only the briefest of glances. There was no need for more; already he was quite 
certain that Japetus was indeed his goal. 

All the other satellites were pitted by occasional meteor craters - though 
these were much fewer than on Mars - and showed apparently random patterns 
of light and shade, with here and there a few bright spots that were probably 
patches of frozen gas. Japetus alone possessed a distinctive geography, and a 
very strange one indeed. 

One hemisphere of the satellite, which, like its companions, turned the 
same face always toward Saturn, was extremely dark, and showed very little 
surface detail. In complete contrast, the other was dominated by a brilliant white 
oval, about four hundred miles long and two hundred wide. At the moment, only 
part of this striking formation was in daylight, but the reason for Japetus's 
extraordinary variations in brilliance was now quite obvious. On the Western side 
of the moon's orbit, the bright ellipse was presented toward the Sun - and the 
Earth. On the eastern phase, the patch was turned away, and only the poorly 
reflecting hemisphere could be observed. 

The great ellipse was perfectly symmetrical, straddling the equator of 
Japetus with its major axis pointing toward the poles; and it was so sharp-edged 
that it almost looked as if someone had carefully painted a huge white oval on 
the face of the little moon. It was completely flat, and Bowman wondered if it 
could be a lake of frozen liquid - though that would hardly account for its 
startlingly artificial appearance. 



But he had little time to study Japetus on his way into the heart of the 
Saturnian system, for the climax of the voyage - Discovery's last perturbation 
maneuver - was rapidly approaching. In the Jupiter fly-by, the ship had used the 
gravitational field of the planet to increase her velocity. Now she must do the 
reverse; she had to lose as much speed as possible, lest she escape from the Solar 
System and fly on to the stars. Her present course was one designed to trap her, 
so that she would become another moon of Saturn, shuttling back and forth 
along a narrow, two-million-mile-long ellipse. At its near point it would almost 
graze the planet; at its far one, it would touch the orbit of Japetus. 

The computers back on Earth, though their information was always three 
hours late, had assured Bowman that everything was in order. Velocity and 
altitude were correct; there was nothing more to be done, until the moment of 
closest approach. 

The immense system of rings now spanned the sky, and already the ship 
was passing over its outermost edge. As he looked down upon them from a 
height of some ten thousand miles, Bowman could see through the telescope that 
the rings were made largely of ice, glittering and scintillating in the light of the 
Sun. He might have been flying over a snowstorm that occasionally cleared to 
reveal, where the ground should have been, baffling glimpses of night and stars. 

As Discovery curved stili closer toward Saturn, the Sun slowly descended 
toward the multiple arches of the rings. Now they had become a slim, silver 
bridge spanning the entire sky; though they were too tenuous to do more than 
dim the sunlight, their myriads of crystals refracted and scattered it in dazzling 
pyrotechnics. And as the Sun moved behind the thousand-mile-wide drifts of 
orbiting ice, pale ghosts of itself marched and merged across the sky, and the 
heavens were filled with shifting flares and flashes. Then the Sun sank below the 
rings, so that they framed it with their arches, and the celestial fireworks ceased. 

A little later, the ship curved into the shadow of Saturn, as it made its 
closest approach over the night side of the planet. Above shone the stars and the 
rings; below lay a dimly visible sea of clouds. There were none of the 
mysterious patterns of luminosity that had glowed in the Jovian night; perhaps 
Saturn was too cold for such displays. The mottled cloudscape was revealed only 
by the ghostly radiance reflected back from the circling icebergs, stili 
illuminated by the hidden Sun. 



But in the center of the arch there was a wide, dark gap, like the missing 
span of an uncompleted bridge, where the shadow of the planet lay across its 
rings. 


Radio contact with Earth had been broken, and could not be resumed until 
the ship emerged from the eclipsing bulk of Saturn. It was perhaps as well that 
Bowman was too busy now to think of his suddenly enhanced loneliness; for the 
next few hours, every second would be occupied as he checked the braking 
maneuvers, already programmed by the computers on Earth. 

After their months of idleness, the main thrusters began to blast out their 
miles-long cataracts of glowing plasma. Gravity returned, though briefly, to the 
weightless world of the control deck. And hundreds of miles below, the clouds 
of methane and frozen ammonia blazed with a light that they had never known 
before, as Discovery swept, a fierce and tiny sun, through the Saturnian night. 

At last, the pale dawn lay ahead; the ship, moving more and more slowly 
now, was emerging into day. It could no longer escape from the Sun, or even 
from Saturn - but it was stili moving swiftly enough to rise away from the planet 
until it grazed the orbit of Japetus, two million miles out. 

It would take Discovery fourteen days to make that climb, as she coasted 
once more, though in reverse order, across the paths of all the inner moons. One 
by one she would cut through the orbits of Janus, Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, 
Dione, Rhea, Titan, Hyperion - worlds bearing the names of gods and goddesses 
who had vanished only yesterday, as time was counted here. 

Then she would meet Japetus, and must make her rendezvous. If she 
failed, she would fall back toward Saturn and repeat her twenty-eight-day ellipse 
indefinitely. 

There would be no chance for a second rendezvous if Discovery missed on 
this attempt. The next time around, Japetus would be far away, almost on the 
other side of Saturn. 

It was true that they would meet again, when the orbits of ship and 
satellite meshed for a second time. But that appointment was so many years 
ahead that, whatever happened, Bowman knew he would not witness it. 



35 - The Eye of Japetus 


When Bowman had first observed Japetus, that curious elliptical patch, of 
brilliance had been partly in shadow, illuminated only by the light of Saturn. 
Now, as the Moon moved slowly along its seventy-nine-day orbit, it was 
emerging into the full light of day. 

As he watched it grow, and Discovery rose more and more sluggishly 
toward her inevitable appointment, Bowman became aware of a disturbing 
obsession. He never mentioned it in his conversations - or, rather, his running 
commentaries - with Mission Control, because it might have seemed that he was 
already suffering from delusions. 

Perhaps, indeed, he was; for he had half convinced himself that the bright 
ellipse set against the dark background of the satellite was a huge, empty eye, 
staring at him as he approached. It was an eye without a pupil, for nowhere 
could he see anything to mar its perfect blankness. 

Not until the ship was only fifty thousand miles out, and Japetus was twice 
as large as Earth's familiar Moon, did he notice the tiny black dot at the exact 
center of the ellipse. But there was no time, then, for any detailed examination; 
the terminal maneuvers were already upon him. 

For the last time, Discovery's main drive released its energies. For the last 
time, the incandescent fury of dying atoms blazed among the moons of Saturn. 
To David Bowman, the far-off whisper and rising thrust of the jets brought a 
sense of pride - and of sadness. The superb engines had done their duty with 
flawless efficiency. They had brought the ship from Earth to Jupiter to Saturn; 
now this was the very last time that they would ever operate. When Discovery 
had emptied her propellant tanks, she would be as helpless and inert as any 
comet or asteroid, a powerless prisoner of gravitation. Even when the rescue ship 
arrived a few years hence, it would not be an economical proposition to refuel 
her, so that she could fight her way back to Earth. She would be an eternally 
orbiting monument to the early days of planetary exploration. 



The thousands of miles shrank to hundreds, and as they did so, the fuel 
gauges dropped swiftly toward zero. At the control panel, Bowman's eyes 
flickered anxiously back and forth over the situation display, and the improvised 
charts which he now had to consuit for any real-time decisions. It would be an 
appalling anticlimax if, having survived so much, he failed to make rendezvous 
through lack of a few pounds of fuel. 

The whistle of the jets faded, as the main thrust died and only the verniers 
continued to nudge Discovery gently into orbit. Japetus was now a giant crescent 
that filled the sky; until this moment, Bowman had always thought of it as a tiny, 
insignificant object - as indeed it was compared with the world around which it 
circled. Now, as it loomed menacingly above him, it seemed enormous - a 
cosmic hammer poised to crush Discovery like a nutshell. 

Japetus was approaching so slowly that it scarcely seemed to move, and it 
was impossible to teli the exact moment when it made the subtle change from an 
astronomical body to a landscape, only fifty miles below. The faithful verniers 
gave their last spurts of thrust, then closed down forever. The ship was in its 
final orbit, completing one revolution every three hours at a mere eight hundred 
miles an hour - all the speed that was required in this feeble gravitational field. 


Discovery has become a satellite of a satellite. 


36 - Big Brother 


'Tm coming round to the daylight side again, and it's just as I reported on 
the last orbit. This place seems to have only two kinds of surface material. The 
black stuff looks burned, almost like charcoal, and with the same kind of texture 
as far as I can judge in the telescope. In fact, it reminds me very much of burned 
toast. 


"I stili can't make any sense of the white area. It starts at an absolutely 
sharp-edged boundary, and shows no surface detail at all. It could even be a 



liquid - it's flat enough. I don't know what impression you've got from the videos 
I've transmitted, but if you picture a sea of frozen milk you'll get the idea exactly. 

"It could even be some heavy gas - no, I suppose that's impossible. 
Sometimes I get the feeling that it's moving, very slowly: but I can never be sure. 

I'm over the white area again, on my third orbit. This time I hope to pass 
closer to that mark I spotted at its very center, when I was on my way in. 

If my calculations are correct, I should go within fifty miles of it - 
whatever it is. 

Yes, there's something ahead, just where I calculated. It's coming up over 
the horizon - and so is Saturn, in almost the same quarter of the sky - I'll move to 
the telescope... 

“Helio! It looks like some kind of building - complefely black - quite hard 
to see. No Windows or any other features. Just a big, vertical slab - it must be at 
least a mile high to be visible from this distance. It reminds me - of course! It's 
just like the thing you found on the Moon! This is TMA-1's big brother!” 


37 - Experiment 


Call it the Star Crate. 

For three million years, it had circled Saturn, waiting for a moment of 
destiny that might never come. In its making, a moon had been shattered, and the 
debris of its creation orbited stili. 

Now the long wait was ending. On yet another world, intelligence had 
been born and was escaping from its planetary cradle. An ancient experiment 
was about to reach its climax. 


Those who had begun that experiment, so long ago, had not been men - or 
even remotely human. But they were flesh and blood, and when they looked out 



across the deeps of space, they bad felt awe, and wonder, and loneliness. As soon 
as they possessed the power, they set forth for the stars. 


In their explorations, they encountered life in many forms, and watched 
the workings of evolution on a thousand worlds. They saw how often the first 
faint sparks of intelligence flickered and died in the cosmic night. 

And because, in all the galaxy, they had found nothing more precious than 
Mind, they encouraged its dawning everywhere. They became farmers in the 
fields of stars; they sowed, and sometimes they reaped. 

And sometimes, dispassionately, they had to weed. 

The great dinosaurs had long since perished when the survey ship entered 
the Solar System after a voyage that had already lasted a thousand years. It 
swept past the frozen outer planets, paused briefly above the deserts of dying 
Mars, and presently looked down on Earth. 

Spread out beneath them, the explorers saw a world swarming with life. 
For years they studied, collected, catalogued. When they had learned all that 
they could, they began to modify. They tinkered with the destiny of many 
species, on land and in the ocean. But which of their experiments would succeed 
they could not know for at least a million years. 

They were patient, but they were not yet immortal. There was so much to 
do in this universe of a hundred billion suns, and other worlds were calling. So 
they set out once more into the abyss, knowing that they would never come this 
way again. 

Nor was there any need. The servants they had left behind would do the 

rest. 


On Earth, the glaciers came and went, while above them the changeless 
Moon stili carried its secret. With a yet slower rhythm than the polar ice, the 
tides of civilization ebbed and flowed across the galaxy. Strange and beautiful 
and terrible empires rose and feli, and passed on their knowledge to their 
successors. Earth was not forgotten, but another visit would serve little purpose. 
It was one of a million silent worlds, few of which would ever speak. 



And now, out among the stars, evolution was driving toward new goals. 
The first explorers of Earth had long since come to the limits of flesh and blood; 
as soon as their machines were better than their bodies, it was time to move. 
First their brains, and then their thoughts alone, they transferred into shining new 
homes of metal and of plastic. 

In these, they roamed among the stars. They no longer built spaceships. 
They were spaceships. 

But the age of the Machine-entities swiftly passed. In their ceaseless 
experimenting, they had learned to store knowledge in the structure of space 
itself, and to preserve their thoughts for eternity in frozen lattices of light. They 
could become creatures of radiation, free at last from the tyranny of matter. 

Into pure energy, therefore, they presently transformed themselves; and on 
a thousand worlds, the empty shells they had discarded twitched for a while in a 
mindless dance of death, then crumbled into msty 

Now they were lords of the galaxy, and beyond the reach of time. They 
could rove at will among the stars, and sink like a subtle mist through the very 
interstices of space. But despite their godlike powers, they had not wholly 
forgotten their origin, in the warm slime of a vanished sea. 

And they stili watched over the experiments their ancestors had started, so 
long ago. 


38 - The Sentinel 


"The air in the ship is getting quite foul, and I have a headache most of the 
time. There's stili plenty of oxygen, but the purifiers never really cleaned up all 
the messes after the liquids aboard started boiling into vacuum. When things get 
too bad, I go down into the garage and bleed off some pure oxygen from the 
pods. 


"There's been no reaction to any of my signals, and because of my orbital 



inclination, I'm getting slowly farther and farther away from TMA-2. 
Incidentally, the name you've given it is doubly inappropriate - there's stili no 
trace of a magnetic field. 

"At the moment my closest approach is sixty miles; it will increase to 
about a hundred as Japetus rotates beneath me, then drop back to zero. I'll pass 
directly over the thing in thirty days - but that's too long to wait, and then it will 
be in darkness, anyway. 

"Even now, it's only in sight for a few minutes before it falis below the 
horizon again. It's damn frustrating -1 can't make any serious observations. 

"So I'd like your approval of this plan. The space pods have ample delta 
vee for a touchdown and a return to the ship. I want to go extravehicular and 
make a close survey of the object. If it appears safe, IT1 land beside it - or even 
on top of it. 

"The ship will stili be above my horizon while I'm going down, so I won't 
be out of touch for more than ninety minutes. 

Tm convinced that this is the only thing to do. I've come a billion miles -1 
don't want to be stopped by the last sixty." 


For weeks, as it stared forever Sunward with its strange senses, the Star 
Gate had watched the approaching ship. Its makers had prepared it for many 
things, and this was one of them. It recognized what was climbing up toward it 
from the warm heart of the Solar System. 

If it had been alive, it would have felt excitement, but such an emotion 
was wholly beyond its powers. Even if the ship had passed it by, it would not 
have known the slightest trace of disappointment. It had waited three million 
years; it was prepared to wait for eternity. 

It observed, and noted, and took no action, as the visitor checked its speed 
with jets of incandescent gas. Presently it felt the gentle touch of radiations, 
trying to probe its secrets. And stili it did nothing. 



Now the ship was in orbit, circling low above the surface of this strangely 
piebald moon. It began to speak, with blasts of radio waves, counting out the 
prime numbers from 1 to 11, over and over again. Soon these gave way to more 
complex signals, at many frequencies-ultraviolet, infrared, X rays. The Star Gate 
made no reply; it had nothing to say. 

There was a long pause, then, before it observed that something was 
falling down toward it from the orbiting ship. It searched its memories, and the 
logic circuits made their decisions, according to the orders given them long ago. 

Beneath the cold light of Saturn, the Star Gate awakened its slumbering 
powers. 


39 - Into the Eye 


Discovery looked just as he had last seen her from space, floating in lunar 
orbit with the Moon taking up half the sky. Perhaps there was one slight change; 
be could not be sure, but some of the paint of her external lettering, announcing 
the purpose of various hatches, connections, umbilical plugs, and other 
attachment, had faded during its long exposure to the unshielded Sun. 

That Sun was now an object that no man would have recognized. It was 
far too bright to be a star, but one could look directly at its tiny disk without 
discomfort. It gave no heat at ali; when Bowman held his ungloved hands in its 
rays, as they streamed through the space pod's window, he could feel nothing 
upon his skin. He might have been trying to warm himself by the light of the 
Moon; not even the alien landscape fifty miles below reminded him more vividly 
of his remoteness from Earth. 

Now he was leaving, perhaps for the last time, the metal world that had 
been his horne for so many months. Even if he never returned, the ship would 
continue to perform its duty, broadcasting instrument readings back to Earth 
until there was some final, catastrophic failure in its circuits. 


And if he did return? Well, he could keep alive, and perhaps even sane, for 



a few more months. But that was ali, for the hibernation systems were useless 
with no computer to monitor them. He could not possibly survive until 
Discovery II made its rendezvous with Japetus, four or five years hence. 

He put these thoughts behind him, as the golden crescent of Saturn rose in 
the sky ahead. In all history, he was the only man to have seen this sight. To all 
other eyes, Saturn had always shown its whole illuminated disk turned full 
toward the Sun. Now it was a delicate bow, with the rings forming a thin line 
across it - like an arrow about to be loosed, into the face of the Sun itself. 

Also in the line of the rings was the bright star of Titan, and the fainter 
sparks of the other moons. Before this century was half gone, men would have 
visited them all; but whatever secrets they might hold, he would never know. 

The sharp-edged boundary of the blind white eye was sweeping toward 
him; there was only a hundred miles to go, and he would be over his target in 
less than ten minutes. He wished that there was some way of telling if his words 
were reaching Earth, now an hour and a half away at the speed of light. It would 
be the ultimate irony if, through some breakdown in the relay system, he 
disappeared into silence, and no one ever knew what had happened to him. 

Discovery was stili a brilliant star in the black sky far above. He was 
pulling ahead as he gained speed during his descent, but soon the pod's braking 
jets would slow him down and the ship would sail on out of sight - leaving him 
alone on this shining plain with the dark mystery at its center. 

A block of ebony was climbing above the horizon, eclipsing the stars 
ahead. He rolled the pod around its gyros, and used full thrust to break his orbital 
speed. In a long, flat arc, he descended toward the surface of Japetus. 

On a world of higher gravity, the maneuver would have been far too 
extravagant of fuel. But here the space pod weighed only a score of pounds; he 
had several minutes of hovering time before he would cut dangerously into his 
reserve and be stranded without any hope of return to the stili orbiting 
Discovery. Not, perhaps, that it made much difference... 

His altitude was stili about five miles, and he was heading straight toward 
the huge, dark mass that soared in such geometrical perfection above the 
featureless plain. It was as blank as the flat white surface beneath; until now, he 



had not appreciated how enormous it really was. There were very few single 
buildings on Earth as large as this; his carefully measured photographs indicated 
a height of almost two thousand feet. And as far as could be judged, its 
proportions were precisely the same as TMA-1's - that curious ratio 1 to 4 to 9. 

'Tm only three miles away now, holding altitude at four thousand feet. 
Stili not a sign of activity - nothing on any of the instruments. The faces seem 
absolutely smooth and polished. Surely you'd expect some meteorite damage 
after all this time! 

"And there's no debris on the -1 suppose one could call it the roof. No sign 
of any opening, either. I'd been hoping there might be some way in. 

"Now I'm right above it, hovering five hundred feet up. I don't want to 
waste any time, since Discovery will soon be out of range. I'm going to land. It's 
certainly solid enough - and if it isn't I'll blast off at once. 

“Just a minute - that's odd 

Bowman's voice died into the silence of utter bewilderment. He was not 
alarmed; he literally could not describe what he was seeing. 

He had been hanging above a large, flat rectangle, eight hundred feet long 
and two hundred wide, made of something that looked as solid as rock. But now 
it seemed to be receding from him; it was exactly like one of those optical 
illusions, when a three-dimensional object can, by an effort of will, appear to 
turn inside out - its near and far sides suddenly interchanging. 

That was happening to this huge, apparently solid structure. Impossibly, 
incredibly, it was no longer a monolith rearing high above a flat plain. What had 
seemed to be its roof had dropped away to infinite depths; for one dizzy 
moment, he seemed to be looking down into a vertical shaft - a rectangular duct 
which defied the laws of perspective, for its size did not decrease with distance... 


The Eye of Japetus had blinked, as if to remove an irritating speck of dust. 
David Bowman had time for just one broken sentence which the waiting men in 
Mission Control, nine hundred million miles away and eighty minutes in the 



future, were never to forget: 

“The thing's hollow - it goes on forever - and - oh my God! - it's full of 

stars!” 


40 - Exit 


The Star Gate opened. The Star Gate closed. 

In a moment of time too short to be measured, Space turned and twisted 
upon itself. 

Then Japetus was alone once more, as it had been for three million years - 
alone, except for a deserted but not yet derelict ship, sending back to its makers 
messages which they could neither believe nor understand. 


VI - THROUGH THE STARGATE 
41 - Grand Central 


There was no sense of motion, but he was falling toward those impossible 
stars, shining there in the dark heart of a moon. No - that was not where they 
really were, he felt certain. He wished, now that it was far too late, that he had 
paid more attention to those theories of hyperspace, of transdimensional ducts. 
To David Bowman, they were theories no longer. 

Perhaps that monolith on Japetus was hollow; perhaps the “roof” was only 
an illusion, or some kind of diaphragm that had opened to let him through. (But 
into what?) As far as he could trust his senses, he appeared to be dropping 
vertically down a huge rectangular shaft, several thousand feet deep. He was 
moving faster and faster - but the far end never changed its size, and remained 



always at the same distance from him. 


Only the stars moved, at first so slowly that it was some time before he 
realized that they were escaping out of the frame that held them. But in a little 
while it was obvious that the star field was expanding, as if it was rushing 
toward him at an inconceivable speed. 

The expansion was nonlinear; the stars at the center hardly seemed to 
move, while those toward the edge accelerated more and more swiftly, until they 
became streaks of light just before they vanished from view. 

There were always others to replace them, flowing into the center of the 
field from an apparently inexhaustible source. Bowman wondered what would 
happen if a star came straight toward him; would it continue to expand until he 
plunged directly into the face of a sun? But not one came near enough to show a 
disk; eventually they all veered aside, and streaked over the edge of their 
rectangular frame. 

And stili the far end of the shaft came no closer. It was almost as if the 
walls were moving with him, carrying him to his unknown destination. Or 
perhaps he was really motionless, and space was moving past him... 

Not only space, he suddenly realized, was involved in whatever was 
happening to him now. The clock on the pod's small instrument panel was also 
behaving strangely. 

Normally, the numbers in the tenths-of-a-second window flickered past so 
quickly that it was almost impossible to read them; now they were appearing and 
disappearing at discrete intervals, and he could count them off one by one 
without difficulty. The seconds themselves were passing with incredible 
slowness, as if time itself were coming to a stop. At last, the tenth-of-a-second 
counter froze between 5 and 6. 

Yet he could stili think, and even observe, as the ebon walls flowed past at 
a speed that might have been anything between zero and a million times the 
velocity of light. Somehow, he was not in the least surprised, nor was he 
alarmed. On the contrary, he felt a sense of calm expectation, such as he had 
once known when the space medies had tested him with hallueinogenie drugs. 
The world around him was strange and wonderful, but there was nothing to fear. 



He had traveled these millions of miles in search of mystery; and now, it seemed, 
the mystery was coming to him. 

The rectangle ahead was growing lighter. The hominous star streaks were 
paling against a milky sky, whose brilliance increased moment by moment. It 
seemed as if the space pod was heading toward a bank of cloud, uniformly 
Illuminated by the rays of an invisible sun. 

He was emerging from the tunnel. The far end, which until now had 
remained at that same indeterminate distance, neither approaching nor receding, 
had suddenly started to obey the normal laws of perspective. It was coming 
closer, and steadily widening before him. At the same time, he felt that he was 
moving upward, and for a fleeting instant he wondered if he had fallen right 
through Japetus and was now ascending from the other side. But even before the 
space pod soared out into the open he knew that this place had nothing to do 
with Japetus, or with any world within the experience of man. 

There was no atmosphere, for he could see all details unblurred, ciear 
down to an incredibly remote and flat horizon. He must be above a world of 
enormous size - perhaps one much larger than Earth. Yet despite its extent, all 
the surface that Bowman could see was tessellated into obviously artificial 
patterns that must have been miles on a side. It was like the jigsaw puzzle of a 
giant that played with planets; and at the centers of many of those squares and 
triangles and polygons were gaping black shafts - twins of the chasm from which 
he had just emerged. 

Yet the sky above was stranger - and, in its way, more disturbing - than 
even the improbable land beneath. For there were no stars; neither was there the 
blackness of space. There was only a softly glowing milkiness, that gave the 
impression of infinite distance. Bowman remembered a description he had once 
heard of the dreaded Antarctic “whiteout” - “like being inside a ping-pong ball.” 
Those words could be applied perfectly to this weird place, but the explanation 
must be utterly different. This sky could be no meteorological effect of mist and 
snow; there was a perfect vacuum here. 

Then, as Bowman's eyes grew accustomed to the nacreous glow that filled 
the heavens, he became aware of another detail. The sky was not, as he had 
thought at first glance, completely empty. Dotted overhead, quite motionless and 
forming apparently random patterns, were myriads of tiny black specks. 



They were difficult to see, for they were mere points of darkness, but once 
detected they were quite unmistakable. They reminded Bowman of something - 
something so familiar, yet so insane, that he refused to accept the parallel, until 
logic forced it upon him. 

Those black holes in the white sky were stars; he might have been looking 
at a photographic negative of the Milky Way. 

Where in God's name am I? Bowman asked himself; and even as he posed 
the question, he felt certain that he could never know the answer. It seemed that 
space had been turned inside out: this was not a place for man. Though the 
capsule was comfortably warm, he felt suddenly cold, and was afflicted by an 
almost uncontrollable trembling. He wanted to close his eyes, and shut out the 
pearly nothingness that surrounded him; but that was the act of a coward, and he 
would not yield to it. 

The pierced and faceted planet slowly rolled beneath him, without any real 
change of scenery. He guessed that he was about ten miles above the surface, 
and should be able to see any signs of life with ease. 

But this whole world was deserted; intelligence had come here, worked its 
will upon it, and gone its way again. Then he noticed, bumped above the flat 
plain perhaps twenty miles away, a roughly cylindrical pile of debris that could 
only be the carcass of a gigantic ship. It was too distant for him to see any 
details, and it passed out of sight within a few seconds, but he could make out 
broken ribs and dully gleaming sheets of metal that had been partly peeled off 
like the skin of an orange. He wondered how many thousands of years the wreck 
had lain here on this deserted checkerboard - and what manner of creatures had 
sailed it between the stars. 

Then he forgot the derelict, for something was coming up over the 

horizon. 

At first it looked like a flat disk, but that was because it was heading 
almost directly toward him. As it approached and passed beneath, he saw that it 
was spindle-shaped, and several hundred feet long. Though there were faintly 
visible bands here and there along its length, it was hard to focus upon them; the 
object appeared to be vibrating, or perhaps spinning, at a very rapid rate. 



It tapered to a point at either end, and there was no sign of propulsion. 
Only one thing about it was familiar to human eyes, and that was its color. If it 
was indeed a solid artifact, and not an optical phantom, then its makers perhaps 
shared some of the emotions of men. 

But they certainly did not share their limitations, for the spindle appeared 
to be made of gold. 

Bowman moved his head to the rear-view system to watch the thing drop 
behind. It had ignored him completely, and now he saw that it was falling out of 
the sky down toward one of those thousands of great slots. A few seconds later it 
disappeared in a final flash of gold as it dived into the planet. He was alone 
again, beneath that sinister sky, and the sense of isolation and remoteness was 
more overwhelming than ever. 

Then he saw that he also was sinking down toward the mottled surface of 
the giant world, and that another of the rectangular chasms yawned immediately 
below. The empty sky closed above him, the clock crawled to rest, and once 
again his pod was falling between infinite ebon walls, toward another distant 
patch of stars. But now he was sure that he was not returning to the Solar 
System, and in a flash of insight that might have been wholly spurious, he knew 
what this thing must surely be. 

It was some kind of cosmic switching device, routing the traffic of the 
stars through unimaginable dimensions of space and time. He was passing 
through a Grand Central Station of the galaxy. 


42 - The Alien Sky 


Far ahead, the walls of the slot were becoming dimly visible once more, in 
the faint light diffusing downward from some stili hidden source. And then the 
darkness was abruptly whipped away, as the tiny space pod hurtled upward into 
a sky ablaze with stars. 



He was back in space as he knew it, but a single glance told him that he 
was light-centuries from Earth. 

He did not even attempt to find any of the familiar constellations that since 
the beginning of history had been the friends of man; perhaps none of the stars 
that now blazed around him had ever been seen by the unaided human eye. 

Most of them were concentrated in a glowing belt, broken here and there 
with dark bands of obscuring cosmic dust, which completely circled the sky. It 
was like the Milky Way, but scores of times brighter; Bowman wondered if this 
was indeed his own galaxy, seen from a point much closer to its brilliant, 
crowded center. 

He hoped that it was; then he would not be so far from horne. But this, he 
realized at once, was a childish thought. He was so inconceivably remote from 
the Solar System that it made little difference whether he was in his own galaxy 
or the most distant one that any telescope had ever glimpsed. 

He looked back to see the thing from which he was rising, and had another 
shock. Here was no giant, multifaceted world, nor any duplicate of Japetus. 
There was nothing - except an inky shadow against the stars, like a doorway 
opening from a darkened room into a stili darker night. Even as he watched, that 
doorway closed. 

It did not recede from him; it slowly filled with stars, as if a rent in the 
fabric of space had been repaired. Then he was alone beneath the alien sky. 

The space pod was slowly turning, and as it did so it brought fresh 
wonders into view. First there was a perfectly spherical swarm of stars, 
becoming more and more closely packed toward the center until its heart was a 
continuous glow of light. Its outer edges were ill-defined - a slowly thinning halo 
of suns that merged imperceptibly into the background of more distant stars. 

This glorious apparition, Bowman knew, was a globular cluster. He was 
looking upon something that no human eye had ever seen, save as a smudge of 
light in the field of a telescope. He could not remember the distance to the 
nearest known cluster, but he was sure that there were none within a thousand 
light-years of the Solar System. 



The pod continued its slow rotation, to disclose an even stranger sight - a 
huge red sun, many times larger than the Moon as seen from Earth. Bowman 
could look straight into its face without discomfort; judging by its color, it was 
no hotter than a glowing coal. Here and there, set into the somber red, were 
rivers of bright yellow - incandescent Amazons, meandering for thousands of 
miles before they lost themselves in the deserts of this dying sun. 

Dying? No - that was a wholly false impression, born of human 
experience and the emotions aroused by the hues of sunset, or the glow of fading 
embers. This was a star that had left behind the fiery extravagances of its youth, 
had raced through the violets and blues and greens of the spectrum in a few 
fleeting billions of years, and now had settled down to a peaceful maturity of 
unimaginable length. All that had gone before was not a thousandth of what was 
yet to come; the story of this star had barely begun. 

The pod had ceased to roll; the great red sun lay straight ahead. Though 
there was no sense of motion, Bowman knew that he was stili gripped by 
whatever controlling force had brought him here from Saturn. 

All the Science and engineering skill of Earth seemed hopelessly primitive 
now, against the powers that were carrying him to some unimaginable fate. 

He stared into the sky ahead, trying to pick out the goal toward which be 
was being taken - perhaps some planet circling this great sun. But there was 
nothing that showed any visible disk or exceptional brightness; if there were 
planets orbiting here he could not distinguish them from the stellar background. 

Then he noticed that something strange was happening on the very edge of 
the sun's crimson disk. A white glow had appeared there, and was rapidly 
waxing in brilliance; he wondered if he was seeing one of those sudden 
eruptions, or flares, that trouble most stars from time to time. 

The light became brighter and bluer; it began to spread along the edge of 
the sun, whose blood-red hues paled swiftly by comparison. It was almost, 
Bowman told himself, smiling at the absurdity of the thought, as if be were 
watching sunrise - on a sun. 

And so indeed he was. Above the burning horizon lifted something no 
larger than a star, but so brilliant that the eye could not bear to look upon it. A 



mere point of blue-white radiance, like an electric arc, was moving at 
unbelievable speed across the face of the great sun. It must be very close to its 
giant companion; for immediately below it, drawn upward by its gravitational 
pull, was a column of flame thousands of miles high. It was as if a tidal wave of 
fire was marching forever along the equator of this star, in vain pursuit of the 
searing apparition in its sky. 

That pinpoint of incandescence must be a White Dwarf - one of those 
strange, fierce little stars, no larger than the Earth, yet containing a million times 
its mass. Such ill-matched stellar couples were not uncommon; but Bowman had 
never dreamed that one day he would see such a pair with his own eyes. 

The White Dwarf had transited almost half the disk of its companion - it 
must take only minutes to make a complete orbit - when Bowman was at last 
certain that he too was moving. Ahead of him, one of the stars was becoming 
rapidly brighter, and was beginning to drift against its background. It must be 
some small, close body - perhaps the world toward which he was traveling. 

It was upon him with unexpected speed; and he saw that it was not a world 

at ali. 


A dully gleaming cobweb or latticework of metal, hundreds of miles in 
extent, grew out of nowhere until it filled the sky. Scattered across its continent- 
wide surface were structures that must have been as large as cities, but which 
appeared to be machines. Around many of these were assembled scores of 
smaller objects, ranged in neat rows and columns. Bowman had passed several 
such groups before he realized that they were fleets of spaceships; he was flying 
over a gigantic orbital parking lot. 

Because there were no familiar objects by which he could judge the scale 
of the scene flashing by below, it was almost impossible to estimate the size of 
the vessels hanging there in space. But they were certainly enormous; some must 
have been miles in length. They were of many different designs - spheres, 
faceted crystals, slim pencils, ovoids, disks. This must be one of the meeting 
places for the commerce of the stars. 

Or it had been - perhaps a million years ago. For nowhere could Bowman 
see any sign of activity; this sprawling spaceport was as dead as the Moon. 



He knew it not only by the absence of all movement, but by such 
unmistakable signs as great gaps torn in the metal cobweb by the wasplike 
blunderings of asteroids that must have smashed through it, eons ago. This was 
no longer a parking lot: it was a cosmic junk heap. 

He had missed its builders by ages, and with that realization Bowman felt 
a sudden sinking of his heart. Though he had not known what to expect, at least 
he had hoped to meet some intelligence from the stars. 

Now, it seemed, he was too late. He had been caught in an ancient, 
automatic trap, set for some unknown purpose, and stili operating when its 
makers had long since passed away. It had swept him across the galaxy, and 
dumped him (with how many others?) in this celestial Sargasso, doomed soon to 
die when his air was exhausted. 

Well, it was unreasonable to expect more. Already he had seen wonders 
for which many men would have sacrificed their lives. He thought of his dead 
companions; he had no cause for complaint. 

Then he saw that the derelict spaceport was stili sliding past him with 
undiminished speed. He was sweeping over its outlying suburbs; its ragged edge 
went by, and no longer partially eclipsed the stars. In a few more minutes, it had 
fallen behind. 

His fate did not lie here - but far ahead, in the huge, crimson sun toward 
which the space pod was now unmistakably falling. 


43 - Inferno 


Now there was only the red sun, filling the sky from side to side. He was 
so close that its surface was no longer frozen into immobility by sheer scale. 
There were luminous nodule s moving to and fro, cyclones of ascending and 
descending gas, prominences slowly rocketing toward the heavens. Slowly? 
They must be rising at a million miles an hour for their movement to be visible 
to his eye. 



He did not even attempt to grasp the scale of the inferno toward which he 
was descending. The immensities of Saturn and Jupiter bad defeated him, during 
Discovery's fly-by in that solar system now unknown gigamiles away. But 
everything he saw here was a hundred times larger stili; he could do nothing but 
accept the images that were flooding into his mind, without attempting to 
interpret them. 

As that sea of fire expanded beneath him, Bowman should have known 
fear - but, curiously enough, he now felt only a mild apprehension. It was not 
that his mind was benumbed with wonders; logic told him that he must surely be 
under the protection of some controlling and almost omnipotent intelligence. He 
was now so close to the red sun that he would have been burned up in a moment 
if its radiation had not been held at bay by some invisible screen. And during his 
voyage he had been subjected to accelerations that should have crushed him 
instantly - yet he had felt nothing. If so much trouble had been taken to preserve 
him, there was stili cause for hope. 

The space pod was now moving along a shallow arc almost parallel to the 
surface of the star, but slowly descending toward it. And now, for the first time, 
Bowman became aware of sounds. There was a faint, continuous roar, broken 
from time to time by crackles like tearing paper, or distant lightning. This could 
be only the feeblest echo of an unimaginable cacophony; the atmosphere 
surrounding him must be racked by concussions that could tear any material 
object to atoms. Yet he was protected from this shattering tumuit as effectively 
as from the heat. 

Though ridges of flame thousands of miles high were rising and slowly 
collapsing around him, he was completely insulated from all this violence. The 
energies of the star raved past him, as if they were in another universe; the pod 
moved sedately through their midst, un-buffeted and unscorched. 

Bowman's eyes, no longer hopelessly confused by the strangeness and 
grandeur of the scene, began to pick out details which must have been there 
before, but which he had not yet perceived. The surface of this star was no 
formless chaos; there was pattern here, as in everything that nature created. 

He noticed first the little whirlpools of gas - probably no larger than Asia 
or Africa - that wandered over the surface of the star. Sometimes he could look 



directly down into one of them, to see darker, cooler regions far below. 
Curiously enough, there appeared to be no sunspots; perhaps they were a disease 
peculiar to the star that shone on Earth. 

And there were occasional clouds, like wisps of smoke blown before a 
gale. Perhaps they were indeed smoke, for this sun was so cold that real fire 
could exist here. Chemical compounds could be born and could live for a few 
seconds before they were again ripped apart by the fiercer nuclear violence that 
surrounded them. 

The horizon was growing brighter, its color changing from gloomy red to 
yellow to blue to blistering violet. 

The White Dwarf was coming up over the horizon, dragging its tidal wave 
of star-stuff behind it. 

Bowman shielded his eyes from the intolerable glare of the little sun, and 
focused on the troubled starscape which its gravitational field was sucking 
skyward. Once he had seen a waterspout moving across the face of the 
Caribbean; this tower of flame had almost the same shape. Only the scale was 
slightly different, for at its base, the column was probably wider than the planet 
Earth. 


And then, immediately beneath him, Bowman noticed something which 
was surely new, since he could hardly have overlooked it if it had been there 
before. Moving across the ocean of glowing gas were myriads of bright beads; 
they shone with a pearly light which waxed and waned in a period of a few 
seconds. And they were all traveling in the same direction, like salmon moving 
upstream; sometimes they weaved back and forth so that their paths intertwined, 
but they never touched. 

There were thousands of them, and the longer Bowman stared, the more 
convinced he became that their motion was purposeful. They were too far away 
for him to make out any details of their structure; that be could see them at all in 
this colossal panorama meant that they must be scores - perhaps hundreds - of 
miles across. If they were organized entities, they were leviathans indeed, built 
to match the scale of the world they inhabited. 


Perhaps they were only clouds of plasma, given temporary stability by 



some odd combination of natural forces - like the short-lived spheres of ball- 
lightning that stili puzzled terrestrial scientists. That was an easy, and perhaps 
soothing, explanation; but as Bowman looked down upon that star-wide 
streaming, he could not really believe it. Those glittering nodes of light knew 
where they were going; they were deliberately converging upon the pillar of fire 
raised by the White Dwarf as it orbited overhead. 

Bowman stared once more at that ascending column, now marching along 
the horizon beneath the tiny, massive star that ruled it. Could it be pure 
imagination - or were there patches of brighter luminosity creeping up that great 
geyser of gas, as if myriads of shining sparks had combined into whole 
continents of phosphorescence? 

The idea was almost beyond fantasy, but perhaps he was watching nothing 
less than a migration from star to star, across a bridge of fire. Whether it was a 
movement of mindless, cosmic beasts driven across space by some lemming-like 
urge, or a vast concourse of intelligent entities, he would probably never know. 

He was moving through a new order of creation, of which few men had 
ever dreamed. Beyond the realms of sea and land and air and space lay the 
realms of fire, which he alone had been privileged to glimpse. It was too much to 
expect that he would also understand. 


44 - Reception 


The pillar of fire was marching over the edge of the sun, like a storm 
passing beyond the horizon. The scurrying flecks of light no longer moved 
across the redly glowing starscape stili thousands of miles below. Inside his 
space pod, protected from an environment that could annihilate him within a 
millisecond, David Bowman awaited whatever had been prepared. 

The White Dwarf was sinking fast as it hurtled along its orbit; presently it 
touched the horizon, set it aflame, and disappeared. A false twilight feli upon the 
inferno beneath, and in the sudden change of illumination Bowman became 
aware that something was happening in the space around him. 



The world of the red sun seemed to ripple, as if he were looking at it 
through running water. For a moment he wondered if this was some refractive 
effect, perhaps caused by the passage of an tinusually violent shock wave 
through the tortured atmosphere in which he was immersed. 

The light was fading; it seemed that a second twilight was about to fall. 
Involuntarily, Bowman looked upward, then checked himself sheepishly, as he 
remembered that here the main source of light was not the sky, but the blazing 
world below. 

It seemed as if walls of some material like smoked glass were thickening 
around him, cutting out the red glow and obscuring the view. It became darker 
and darker; the faint roar of the stellar hurricanes also faded out. The space pod 
was floating in silence, and in night. 

A moment later, there was the softest of bumps as it settled on some hard 
surface, and came to rest. 

To rest on what? Bowman asked himself incredulously. Then light 
returned; and incredulity gave way to a heart-sinking despair - for as he saw 
what lay around him, he knew that he must be mad. 

He was prepared, he thought, for any wonder. The only thing he had never 
expected was the utterly commonplace. 

The space pod was resting on the polished floor of an elegant, anonymous 
hotel suite that might have been in any large city on Earth. He was staring into a 
living room with a coffee table, a divan, a dozen chairs, a writing desk, various 
lamps, a half-filled bookcase with some magazines lying on it, and even a bowl 
of flowers. Van Gogh's Bridge at Aries was hanging on one wall - Wyeth's 
Christina's World on another. He felt confident that when he pulled open the 
drawer of that desk, he would find a Gideon Bible inside it... 

If he was indeed mad, his delusions were beautifully organized. 
Everything was perfectly real; nothing vanished when he turned his back. The 
only incongruous element in the scene - and that certainly a major one - was the 
space pod itself. 



For many minutes, Bowman did not move from his seat. He half expected 
the vision around him to go away, but it remained as solid as anything be bad 
ever seen in his life. 

It was real - or else a phantom of the senses so superbly contrived that 
there was no way of distinguishing it from reality. Perhaps it was some kind of 
test; if so, not only his fate but that of the human race might well depend upon 
his actions in the next few minutes. 

He could sit here and wait for something to happen, or he could open the 
pod and step outside to challenge the reality of the scene around him. The floor 
appeared to be solid; at least, it was bearing the weight of the space pod. He was 
not likely to fall through it - whatever “it” might really be. 

But there was stili the question of air; for all that he could teli, this room 
might be in vacuum, or might contain a poisonous atmosphere. He thought it 
very unlikely - no one would go to all this trouble without attending to such an 
essential detail - but he did not propose to take unnecessary risks. In any event, 
his years of training made him wary of contamination; he was reluctant to 
expose himself to an unknown environment until he knew that there was no 
alternative. This place looked like a hotel room somewhere in the United States. 
That did not alter the fact that in reality he must be hundreds of light-years from 
the Solar System. 

He closed the helmet of his suit, sealing himself in, and actuated the hatch 
of the space pod. There was a brief hiss of pressure equalization; then he stepped 
out into the room. 

As far as he could teli, he was in a perfectly normal gravity field. He 
raised one arm, then let it fall freely. It flopped to his side in less than a second. 

This made everything seem doubly unreal. Here he was wearing a 
spacesuit, standing - when he should have been floating - outside a vehicle 
which could only function properly in the absence of gravity. All his normal 
astronaufs reflexes were upset; he had to think before he made every movement. 

Like a man in a trance he walked slowly from his bare, unfurnished half of 
the room toward the hotel suite. It did not, as he had almost expected, disappear 
as he approached, but remained perfectly real - and apparently perfectly solid. 



He stopped beside the coffee table. On it sat a conventional Bell System 
vision-phone, complete with the local directory. He bent down and picked iip the 
volume with his clumsy, gloved hands. 

It bore, in the familiar type he had seen thousands of times, the name: 
WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Then he looked more closely; and for the first time, he had objective proof 
that, although all this might be real, he was not on Earth. 

He could read only the word Washington; the rest of the printing was a 
blur, as if it had been copied from a newspaper photograph. He opened the book 
at random and riffled through the pages. They were all blank sheets of crisp 
white material which was certainly not paper, though it looked very much like it. 

He lifted the telephone receiver and pressed it against the plastic of his 
helmet. If there had been a dialing sound he could have heard it through the 
conducting material. But, as he had expected, there was only silence. 

So - it was all a fake, though a fantastically careful one. And it was clearly 
not intended to deceive but rather - he hoped - to reassure. That was a very 
comforting thought; nevertheless he would not remove his suit until be had 
completed his voyage of exploration. All the furniture seemed sound and solid 
enough; he tried the chairs, and they supported his weight. But the drawers in the 
desk would not open; they were dummies. 

So were the books and magazines; like the telephone directory, only the 
tities were readable. They formed an odd selection - mostly rather trashy best 
sellers, a few sensational works of nonfiction, and some well-publicized 
autobiographies. There was nothing less than three years old, and little of any 
intellectual content. Not that it mattered, for the books could not even be taken 
down from the shelves. 

There were two doors that opened readily enough. The first one took him 
into a small but comfortable bedroom, fitted with a bed, bureau, two chairs, light 
switches that actually worked, and a clothes closet. He opened this, and found 
himself looking at four suits, a dressing gown, a dozen white shirts, and several 
sets of underwear, all neatly draped from hangers. 



He took down one of the suits, and inspected it carefully. As far as his 
gloved hands could judge, it was made of material that was more like fur than 
wool. It was also a little out of style; on Earth, no one had been wearing single- 
breasted suits for at least four years. 

Next to the bedroom was a bathroom, complete with fittings which, he 
was relieved to note, were not dummies, but worked in a perfectly normal 
manner. And after that was a kitchenette, with electric cooker, refrigerator, 
storage cupboards, crockery and cutlery, sink, table, and chairs. Bowman began 
to explore this not only with curiosity, but with mounting hunger. 

First he opened the refrigerator, and a wave of cold mist rolled out. The 
shelves were well stocked with packages and cans, ali of them looking perfectly 
familiar from a distance, though at close quarters their proprietary labeis were 
blurred and unreadable. However, there was a notable absence of eggs, milk, 
butter, meat, fruit, or any other unprocessed food; the refrigerator held only 
items that had already been packaged in some way. 

Bowman picked up a carton of a familiar breakfast cereal, thinking as he 
did so that it was odd to keep this frozen. The moment he lifted the package, he 
knew that it certainly did not contain cornflakes; it was much too heavy. 

He ripped open the lid, and examined the contents. 

The box contained a slightly moist blue substance, of about the weight and 
texture of bread pudding. Apart from its odd color, it looked quite appetizing. 

But this is ridiculous, Bowman told himself. I am almost certainly being 
watched, and I must look an idiot wearing this suit. If this is some kind of 
intelligence test, I've probably failed already. Without further hesitation, he 
walked back into the bedroom and began to undo the clamp of his helmet. When 
it was loose, he lifted the helmet a fraction of an inch, cracked the seal and took 
a cautious sniff. As far as he could teli, he was breathing perfectly normal air. 

He dropped the helmet on the bed, and began thankfully - and rather stiffly 
- to divest himself of his suit. When he had finished, he stretched, took a few 
deep breaths, and carefully hung the spacesuit up among the more conventional 
articles of clothing in the closet. It looked rather odd there, but the compulsive 



tidiness that Bowman shared with all astronauts would never have allowed him 
to leave it anywhere else. 

Then he walked quickly back into the kitchen and began to inspect the 
“cereal” box at closer quarters. 

The blue bread pudding had a faint, spicy smell, something like a 
macaroon. Bowman weighed it in his hand, then broke off a piece and cautiously 
sniffed at it. Though he felt sure now that there would be no deliberate attempt to 
poison him, there was always the possibility of mistakes - especially in a matter 
so complex as biochemistry. 

He nibbled at a few crumbs, then chewed and swallowed the fragment of 
food; it was excellent, though the flavor was so elusive as to be almost 
indescribable. If he closed his eyes, he could imagine it was meat, or wholemeal 
bread, or even dried fruit. Unless there were unexpected aftereffects, he had no 
cause to fear starvation. 

When he had eaten just a few mouthfuls of the substance, and already felt 
quite satisfied, he looked for something to drink. There were half a dozen cans of 
beer - again of a famous brand - at the back of the refrigerator, and he pressed 
the tab on one of them to open it. 

The prestressed metal lid popped off along its strain lines, exactly as usual. 
But the can did not contain beer; to Bowman's surprised disappointment, it held 
more of the blue food. 

In a few seconds he had opened half a dozen of the other packages and 
cans. Whatever their labeis, their contents were the same; it seemed that his diet 
was going to be a little monotonous, and that he would have nothing but water to 
drink. He filled a glass from the kitchen faucet and sipped at it cautiously. 

He spat out the first few drops at once; the taste was terrible. Then, rather 
ashamed of his instinctive reaction, he forced himself to drink the rest. 

That first sip had been enough to identify the liquid. It tasted terrible 
because it had no taste at all; the faucet was supplying pure, distilled water. His 
unknown hosts were obviously taking no chances with his health. 



Feeling much refreshed, he then had a quick shower. There was no soap, 
which was another minor inconvenience, but there was a very efficient hot-air 
drier in which be luxuriated for a while before trying on underpants, vest, and 
dressing gown from the clothes closet. After that, he lay down on the bed, stared 
up at the ceiling, and tried to make sense of this fantastic situation. 

He had made little progress when he was distracted by another line of 
thought. Immediately above the bed was the usual hotel-type ceiling TV screen; 
he had assumed that, like the telephone and books, it was a dummy. 

But the control unit on its swinging bedside arm looked so realistic that he 
could not resist playing with it; and as his fingers touched the ON sensor disk, 
the screen lit up. 

Feverishly, he started to tap out channel selector codes at random - and 
almost at once he got his first picture. 

It was a well-known African news commentator, discussing the attempts 
being made to preserve the last remnants of his country's wild life. Bowman 
listened for a few seconds, so captivated by the sound of a human voice that he 
did not in the least care what it was talking about. Then he changed channels. 

In the next five minutes, he got a symphony orchestra playing Walton's 
Violin Concerto, a discussion on the sad state of the legitimate theater, a westem, 
a demonstration of a new headache cure, a panel game in some Oriental 
language, a psychodrama, three news commentaries, a football game, a lecture 
on solid geometry (in Russian), and several tuning signals and data 
transmissions. It was, in fact, a perfectly normal selection from the world's TV 
programs, and apart from the psychological uplift it gave him, it confirmed one 
suspicion that had already been forming in his mind. 

All the programs were about two years old. That was around the time 
TMA-1 had been discovered, and it was hard to believe that this was a pure 
coincidence. Something had been monitoring the radio waves; that ebon block 
had been busier than men had suspected. 

He continued to wander across the spectrum, and suddenly recognized a 
familiar scene. Here was this very suite, now occupied by a celebrated actor who 
was furiously denouncing an unfaithful mistress. Bowman looked with a shock 



of recognition upon the living room he had just left - and when the camera 
followed the indignant couple toward the bedroom, he involuntarily looked 
toward the door to see if anyone was entering. 

So that was how this reception area had been prepared for him; his hosts 
had based their ideas of terrestrial living upon TV programs. His feeling that he 
was inside a movie set was almost literally true. 

He had learned all that he wished to for the moment, and turned off the set. 
What do I do now? he asked himself, locking his fingers behind his head and 
staring up at the blank screen. 

He was physically and emotionally exhausted, yet it seemed impossible 
that one could sleep in such fantastic surroundings, and farther from Earth than 
any man in history had ever been. But the comfortable bed, and the instinctive 
wisdom of the body, conspired together against his will. 

He fumbled for the light switch, and the room was plunged into darkness. 
Within seconds, he had passed beyond the reach of dreams. 

So, for the last time, David Bowman slept. 


45 - Recapitulation 


There being no further use for it, the furniture of the suite dissolved back 
into the mind of its creator. Only the bed remained - and the walls, shielding this 
fragile organism from the energies it could not yet control. 

In his sleep, David Bowman stirred restlessly. He did not wake, nor did he 
dream, but he was no longer wholly unconscious. Like a fog creeping through a 
forest, something invaded his mind. He sensed it only dimly, for the full impact 
would have destroyed him as surely as the fires raging beyond these walls. 
Beneath that dispassionate scrutiny, he felt neither hope nor fear; all emotion had 
been leached away. 



He seemed to be floating in free space, while around him stretched, in all 
directions, an infinite geometrical grid of dark lines or threads, along which 
moved tiny nodes of light - some slowly, some at dazzling speed. 

Once he had peered through a microscope at a cross-section of a human 
brain, and in its network of nerve fibers had glimpsed the same labyrinthine 
complexity. But that had been dead and static, whereas this transcended life 
itself. He knew - or believed he knew - that he was watching the operation of 
some gigantic mind, contemplating the universe of which he was so tiny a part. 

The vision, or illusion, lasted only a moment. Then the crystalline planes 
and lattices, and the interlocking perspectives of moving light, flickered out of 
existence, as David Bowman moved into a realm of consciousness that no man 
had experienced before. 

At first, it seemed that Time itself was running backward. Even this 
marvel he was prepared to accept, before be realized the subtler truth. 

The springs of memory were being tapped; in controlled recollection, he 
was reliving the past. There was the hotel suite - there the space pod - there the 
burning starscapes of the red sun - there the shining core of the galaxy - there the 
gateway through which he had reemerged into the universe. And not only vision, 
but all the sense impressions, and all the emotions he had felt at the time, were 
racing past, more and more swiftly. His life was unreeling like a tape recorder 
playing back at ever-increasing speed. 

Now he was once more aboard the Discovery and the rings of Saturn filled 
the sky. Before that, he was repeating his final dialogue with Hal; he was seeing 
Frank Poole leave on his last mission; he was hearing the voice of Earth, 
assuring him that all was well. 

And even as he relived these events, he knew that all indeed was well. He 
was retrogressing down the corridors of time, being drained of knowledge and 
experience as he swept back toward his childhood. But nothing was being lost; 
all that be had ever been, at every moment of his life, was being transferred to 
safer keeping. Even as one David Bowman ceased to exist, another became 
immortal. 


Faster, faster he moved back into forgotten years, and into a simpler 



world. Faces he had once loved, and had thought lost beyond recall, smiled at 
him sweetly. He smiled back with fondness, and without pain. 


Now, at last, the headlong regression was slackening; the wells of memory 
were nearly dry. Time flowed more and more sluggishly, approaching a moment 
of stasis - as a swinging pendulum, at the limit of its arc, seems frozen for one 
eternal instant, before the next cycle begins. 

The timeless instant passed; the pendulum reversed its swing. In an empty 
room, floating amid the fires of a double star twenty thousand light-years from 
Earth, a baby opened its eyes and began to cry. 


46 - Transformation 


Then it became silent, as it saw that it was no longer alone. 

A ghostly, glimmering rectangle had formed in the empty air. It solidified 
into a crystal tablet, lost its transparency, and became suffused with a pale, milky 
luminescence. Tantalizing, ill-defined phantoms moved across its surface and in 
its depths. They coalesced into bars of lights and shadow, then formed 
intermeshing, spoked patterns that began slowly to rotate, in time with the 
pulsing rhythm that now seemed to fili the whole of space. 

It was a spectacle to grasp and hold the attention of any child - or of any 
man-ape. But, as it had been three million years before, it was only the outward 
manifestation of forces too subtle to be consciously perceived. It was merely a 
toy to distract the senses, while the real processing was carried out at far deeper 
levels of the mind. 

This time, the processing was swift and certain, as the new design was 
woven. For in the eons since their last meeting, much had been learned by the 
weaver; and the material on which he practiced his art was now of an infinitely 
finer texture. But whether it should be permitted to form part of his still-growing 
tapestry, only the future could teli. 



With eyes that already held more than human intentness, the baby stared 
into the depths of the crystal monolith, seeing - but not yet understanding - the 
mysteries that lay beyond. It knew that it had come home, that here was the 
origin of many races besides its own; but it knew also that it could not stay. 
Beyond this moment lay another birth, stranger than any in the past. 

Now the moment had come; the glowing patterns no longer echoed the 
secrets in the crystal's heart. As they died, so too the protective walls faded back 
into the nonexistence from which they bad briefly emerged, and the red sun 
filled the sky. 

The metal and plastic of the forgotten space pod, and the clothing once 
worn by an entity who had called himself David Bowman, flashed into flame. 
The last links with Earth were gone, resolved back into their component atoms. 

But the child scarcely noticed, as he adjusted himself to the comfortable 
glow of his new environment. He stili needed, for a little while, this shell of 
matter as the focus of his powers. His indestructible body was his mind's present 
image of itself; and for all his powers, he knew that he was stili a baby. So he 
would remain until he had decided on a new form, or had passed beyond the 
necessities of matter. 

And now it was time to go - though in one sense he would never leave this 
place where he had been reborn, for he would always be part of the entity that 
used this double star for its unfathomable purposes. The direction, though not the 
nature, of his destiny was ciear before him, and there was no need to trace the 
devious path by which he had come. With the instincts of three million years, he 
now perceived that there were more ways than one behind the back of space. 
The ancient mechanisms of the Star Gate had served him well, but he would not 
need them again. 

The glimmering rectangular shape that had once seemed no more than a 
slab of crystal stili floated before him, indifferent as he was to the harmless 
flames of the inferno beneath. It encapsulated yet unfathomed secrets of space 
and time, but some at least he now understood and was able to command. How 
obvious - how necessary - was that mathematical ratio of its sides, the quadratic 
sequence 1:4:9! And how naive to have imagined that the series ended at this 
point, in only three dimensions! 



He focused his mind upon these geometrical simplicities, and as his 
thoughts brushed against it, the empty framework filled with the darkness of the 
interstellar night. The glow of the red sun faded - or, rather, seemed to recede in 
all directions at once - and there before him was the luminous Whirlpool of the 
galaxy. 

It might have been some beautiful, incredibly detailed model, embedded in 
a block of plastic. But it was the reality, grasped as a whole with senses now 
more subtle than vision. If he wished, he could focus his attention upon any one 
of its hundred billion stars; and he could do much more than that. 

Here he was, adrift in this great river of suns, halfway between the banked 
fires of the galactic core and the lonely, scattered sentinel stars of the rim. And 
here he wished to be, on the far side of this chasm in the sky, this serpentine 
band of darkness, empty of all stars. He knew that this formless chaos, visible 
only by the glow that limned its edges from fire-mists far beyond, was the stili 
unused stuff of creation, the raw material of evolutions yet to be. Here, Time had 
not begun; not until the suns that now burned were long since dead would light 
and life reshape this void. 

Unwittingly, he had crossed it once; now he must cross it again - this time, 
of his own volition. The thought filled him with a sudden, freezing terror, so that 
for a moment he was wholly disorientated, and his new vision of the universe 
trembled and threatened to shatter into a thousand fragments. 

It was not fear of the galactic gulfs that chilled his soul, but a more 
profound disquiet, stemming from the unborn future. For he had left behind the 
time scales of his human origin; now, as he contemplated that band of starless 
night, he knew his first intimations of the Eternity that yawned before him. 

Then he remembered that he would never be alone, and his panic slowly 
ebbed. The crystal-clear perception of the universe was restored to him - not, he 
knew, wholly by his own efforts. When he needed guidance in his first faltering 
steps, it would be there. 

Confident once more, like a high diver who had regained his nerve, he 
launched himself across the light-years. The galaxy burst forth from the mental 
frame in which he had enclosed it; stars and nebulae poured past him in an 
illusion of infinite speed. Phantom suns exploded and feli behind as he slipped 



like a shadow through their cores; the cold, dark waste of cosmic dust which he 
had once feared seemed no more than the beat of a raven's wing across the face 
of the Sun. 

The stars were thinning out; the glare of the Milky Way was dimming into 
a pale ghost of the glory he had known - and, when he was ready, would know 
again. 

He was back, precisely where he wished to be, in the space that men called 

real. 


47 - Star-Child 


There before him, a glittering toy no Star-Child could resist, floated the 
planet Earth with ali its peoples. 

He had returned in time. Down there on that crowded globe, the alarms 
would be flashing across the radar screens, the great tracking telescopes would 
be searching the skies - and history as men knew it would be drawing to a close. 

A thousand miles below, he became aware that a slumbering cargo of 
death had awoken, and was stirring sluggishly in its orbit. The feeble energies it 
contained were no possible menaee to him; but he preferred a cleaner sky. He put 
forth his will, and the circling megatons flowered in a silent detonation that 
brought a brief, false dawn to half the sleeping globe. Then he waited, 
marshaling his thoughts and brooding over his stili untested powers. For though 
he was master of the world, he was not quite sure what to do next. 

But he would think of something. 


Epilogue: After 2001 



The novel 2001: A Space Odyssey was written during the years 1964-1968 
and was published in July 1968, shortly after release of the movie. As I have 
described in The Lost Worlds of 2001, both projects proceeded simultaneously, 
with feedback in each direction. 

Thus I often had the strange experience of revising the manuscript after 
viewing rushes based upon an earlier version of the story - a stimulating but 
rather expensive way of writing a novel. 

As a resuit, there is a much closer parallel between book and movie than is 
usually the case, but there are also major differences. In the novel, the 
destination of the spaceship Discovery was Iapetus (or Japetus), most enigmatic 
of Saturn's many moons. The Saturnian system was reached via Jupiter: 
Discovery made a close approach to the giant planet, using its enormous 
gravitational field to produce a “slingshot” effect and to accelerate it along the 
second lap of its journey. Exactly the same maneuver was used by the Voyager 
space-probes in 1979, when they made the first detailed reconnaissance of the 
outer giants. 

In the movie, however, Stanley Kubrick wisely avoided confusion by 
setting the third confrontation between Man and Monolith among the moons of 
Jupiter. Saturn was dropped from the script entirely, though Douglas Trumbull 
later used the expertise he had acquired filming the ringed planet in his own 
production, Silent Running. 

No one could have imagined, back in the mid-sixties, that the exploration 
of the moons of Jupiter lay not in the next century but only fifteen years ahead. 
Nor had anyone dreamed of the wonders that would be found there - although 
we can be quite certain that the discoveries of the twin Voyagers will one day be 
surpassed by even more unexpected finds. When 2001 was written, Io, Europa, 
Ganymede, and Callisto were mere pinpoints of light in even the most powerful 
telescope; now they are worlds, each unique, and one of them - Io - the most 
volcanically active body in the Solar System. 

Yet all things considered, both movie and book stand up quite well in the 
light of these discoveries. There are no major changes I would wish to make to 
the text, and it is fascinating to compare the Jupiter sequences in the film with 
the actual movies from the Voyager cameras. 



It must also be remembered that 2001 was written in an age that now lies 
beyond one of the Great Divides in human history; we are sundered from it 
forever by the moment when Neil Armstrong set foot upon the Moon. July 20, 
1969, was stili half a decade in the future when Stanley Kubrick and I started 
thinking about the “proverbial good Science fiction movie” (his phrase). Now 
history and fiction have become inextricably intertwined. 

The Apollo astronauts had already seen the film when they left for the 
Moon. The crew of Apollo 8, who at Christmas 1968 became the first men ever 
to set eyes upon the lunar Farside, told me that they had been tempted to radio 
back the discovery of a large, black monolith: alas, discretion prevailed... 

And there were later, almost uncanny, instances of nature imitating art. 
Strangest of all was the saga of Apollo 13 in 1970. 

As a good opening, the Command Module, which houses the crew, had 
been christened Odyssey. Just before the explosion of the oxygen tank which 
caused the mission to be aborted, the crew had been playing Richard Strauss' 
Zarathustra theme, now universally identified with the movie. Immediately after 
the loss of power, Jack Swigert radioed back to Mission Control: “Houston, 
we've had a problem.” The words that Hal used to Frank Poole on a similar 
occasion were: “Sony to interrupt the festivities, but we have a problem.” 

When the report of the Apollo 13 mission was later published, NASA 
Administrator Tom Paine sent me a copy and noted under Swigerfs words: “Just 
as you always said it would be, Arthur.” I stili get a very strange feeling when I 
contemplate this whole series of events - almost, indeed, as if I share a certain 
responsibility... 

Another resonance is less serious, but equally striking. One of the most 
technically brilliant sequences in the movie was that in which astronaut Frank 
Poole was shown mnning round and round the circular track of the giant 
centrifuge, held in place by the “artificial gravity” produced by its spin. 

Almost a decade later, the crew of the superbly successful Skylab realized 
that its designers had provided them with a similar geometry; a ring of storage 
cabinets formed a smooth, circular band around the space station's interior. 
Skylab, however, was not spinning, but this did not deter its ingenious 



occupants. They discovered that they could run around the track, just like mice 
in a squirrel cage, to produce a resuit visually indistinguishable from that shown 
in 2001. And they televised the whole exercise back to Earth (need I name the 
accompanying music?) with the comment: “Stanley Kubrick should see this.” As 
in due course he did, because I sent him the telecine recording. (I never got it 
back; Stanley uses a tame Black Hole as a filing system.) 

There is also the strange case of the “Eye of Iapetus,” described in Chapter 
35, where Bowman discovers “a brilliant white oval... so sharp-edged that it 
almost looked... painted on the face of the little moon” with a tiny black dot at 
the exact center, which turns out to be the Monolith (or one of its avatars). 

Well - when Voyager 1 took the first photographs of Iapetus, they did 
indeed disclose a large, clear-cut white oval with a tiny black dot at the center. 
Cari Sagan promptly sent me a print from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory with the 
cryptic annotation “Thinking of you...” I do not know whether to be relieved or 
disappointed that Voyager 2 has left the matter stili open. 

When, fourteen years ago, I typed the final words “For though he was 
master of the world, he was not quite sure what to do next. But he would think of 
something” I felt I had closed the Circuit and precluded all possibility of a 
sequel. Indeed, for the next decade I ridiculed the very idea, for what seemed to 
me conclusive reasons. Since 2001 was concerned with the next stage of human 
evolution, to expect me (or even Stanley) to depict it would be as absurd as 
asking Moon-watcher to describe Bowman and his world. 

Despite my protests, it is now obvious that my busy little subconscious 
was hard at work, perhaps in response to the constant stream of letters from 
readers wanting to know “what happened next.” Finally, as an intellectual 
exercise, I wrote a precis of a possible sequel in the form of a short movie 
outline and sent copies to Stanley Kubrick and my agent, Scott Meredith. As far 
as Stanley was concerned, this was an act of courtesy, for I knew that he never 
repeats himself (just as I never write sequels), but I hoped that Scott would sell 
the outline to Omni magazine, which had recently published another outline, 
“The Songs of Distant Earth.” Then, I fondly hoped, the ghost of 2001 would be 
finally exorcised. 

Stanley expressed guarded interest, but Scott was enthusiastic - and 
implacable. “You've simply got to write the book,” he said. With a groan, I 



realized that he was right... 


So now, gentle reader (to coin a phrase), you can find what happens next 
in 2010: Space Odyssey Two. I am extremely grateful to New American Library, 
Copyright holders of 2001: A Space Odyssey, for permission to use Chapter 37 in 
the new novel; It serves as a link, connecting the two books together. 

A final comment on both novels as seen from a point now almost exactly 
midway between the year 2001 and the time when Stanley Kubrick and I started 
working together. Contrary to popular belief, Science fiction writers very seldom 
attempt to predict the future; indeed, as Ray Bradbury put it so well, they more 
often try to prevent it. In 1964, the first heroic period of the Space Age was just 
opening; the United States had set the Moon as its target, and once that decision 
had been made, the ultimate conquest of the other planets, appeared inevitable. 
By 2001, it seemed quite reasonable that there would be giant space-stations in 
orbit round the Earth and - a little later - manned expeditions to the planets. 

In an ideal world, that would have been possible: the Vietnam War would 
have paid for everything that Stanley Kubrick showed on the Cinerama screen. 
Now we realize that it will take a little longer. 

2001 will not arrive by 2001. Yet - barring accidents - by that date almost 
everything depicted in the book and the movie will be in the advanced planning 
stage. 


Except for communication with alien intelligences: that is something that 
can never be planned - only anticipated. No one knows whether it will happen 
tomorrow - or a thousand years hence. 

But it will happen someday. 


ARTHUR C. CLARKE 
Colombo, Sri Lanka 


November, 1982 